Paul Tucker: Macro, asset price, and financial system uncertainties
Text of the Roy Bridge Lecture delivered by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director Markets and Member
of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England, at the Bank of England, London,
11 December 2006.
*

*

*

It is a great privilege to give this lecture, named in honour of Roy Bridge, for many years a very
distinguished head of foreign exchange at the Bank of England and the first President of your
association, the ACI.
The world in which Bridge worked was so very different from ours that, although my responsibilities
cover the same part of the Bank, I cannot really imagine what he would have made of three striking
features of the current environment which I plan to review this evening.
First, while monetary authorities are commonly given some of the credit for the return of
macroeconomic stability, central bankers themselves devote a great deal of effort to conveying what
they see as risks to the outlook. Second, while some distinguished commentators see a puzzle in
lower macro volatility not having been matched by an equally large decline in asset price volatility,
central bankers by contrast worry publicly that many financial asset prices imply unusually low future
volatility. And third, while central bankers and others in the official sector celebrate the gains in risk
transfer and efficiency brought by recent changes in the structure of the financial system, they also
issue warnings about associated threats to systemic stability.
These three arenas of uncertainty – macroeconomic, financial asset pricing, and the financial system –
are of course intertwined, but I shall initially find it convenient to unbundle them.

Macroeconomic and monetary policy uncertainties
The characteristics of the Great Stability, as some economists call it1, are by now familiar. Essentially,
low inflation on average; much less persistence in deviations of inflation from central banks’ explicit or
implicit targets; and much lower volatility in both output growth and inflation2. Some of the credit is
typically given to better monetary regimes, and I believe it should be.
Yet policy makers also stress a wide range of uncertainties, threatening at least interruptions to the
benign conditions of the past decade or so. This is not just an occupational disposition of central
bankers. To varying degrees, these uncertainties do feature in real-world policy debates. I have
argued previously3 that some risks – such as those posed by global current account imbalances –
could not sensibly be factored in to policy settings ahead of their crystallising. But uncertainties about
the structure of the economy and how monetary policy works do somehow have to feature in our
policy judgments, as I can illustrate with the thinking behind my vote at the MPC’s November
meeting4. Essentially, I balanced two quite different, but quite likely, views of the outlook, which I shall
label Orthodox and Alternative.
Under both stories, private sector demand growth has been reasonably robust and looks, according to
surveys and the Bank’s regional Agents, to continue to be robust for a little while at least.
Notwithstanding the US slowdown, world growth weighted for its significance to UK trade has
remained solid, due largely to recovery in the euro area. Business investment appears to be

1

In the US, ‘Great Moderation’ is preferred, because low inflation had been achieved in an earlier decade. Bernanke, B S
(2004), ‘The Great Moderation’, remarks at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington 2004.

2

See Benati L. (2005), ‘The inflation-targeting framework from an historical perspective’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,
Summer 2005, pp 160 – 168; and Tucker P M W (2005), ‘Monetary policy, stability and structural change’, speech to the
Confederation of British Industry, March 2005, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2005, pp 247-55.

3

Tucker P M W (2006), ‘Reflections on operating inflation targeting’, speech at the Chicago Graduate School of Business,
May 2005, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Summer 2006, page 217.

4

This lecture is being given before publication of the minutes of the Committee’s December meeting, and so I am not at
liberty to discuss my contributions to that meeting.

BIS Review 2/2007

1

recovering. And consumption, although in the near term subject to upside risks from the housing
market but downside risks from household debt, looks most likely to grow close to its average rate.
Surveys and anecdotal information point to firms operating close to capacity, but profit margins have
been squeezed in recent years, essentially by the rise in energy prices. There is some slack in the
labour market. That is deliberately broad brush; the point is that it is common to both stories.
On the Orthodox Story, in conditions of robust aggregate demand, firms operating close to capacity
are likely take opportunities to restore their margins by raising prices, pushing upwards on CPI
inflation. So the Orthodox Story commanded a policy response to prospective inflationary pressures
from excess demand.
Under the Alternative Story, the outlook for inflation may be quite different due to developments in the
labour market, notably from inward migration. There might well be more slack in the labour market
than allowed for in the Orthodox Story. And, most potently, if more workers were to be attracted in to
the country as aggregate demand expands, the economy’s productive capacity would expand as well.
In that case, it would probably be harder for firms to raise prices, although they may still be able to
restore margins by bearing down on costs, especially labour costs. (That is in aggregate; we would
probably see further increases in skill shortages and in the premium for highly skilled labour in the
professions.) On the Alternative Story, the outlook for inflation is highly uncertain – and not necessarily
weaker, although that may seem the most obvious implication.
Indeed, under the Alternative Story, there could well be challenges for monetary policy, which in its
modern mode operates essentially by using Bank Rate to regulate aggregate demand relative to
aggregate supply, exploiting a short-run trade off between growth and inflation so long as inflation
expectations are well anchored. If aggregate supply were to become endogenous in the way I have
described, the short-run trade off might well be less pronounced for a while. That would make it harder
to judge inflationary pressures from gauging the amount of slack in the economy; and harder for the
Bank to achieve our 2% inflation target by broadly steering demand conditions. In that scenario, it
would matter enormously that wage and price setters continued to act on the basis that CPI inflation
would remain in line with the 2% target over the medium term.
For me, both the Orthodox and Alternative Stories are plausible. In that sense, I think the outlook is
‘bimodal’ – in terms of there being two main stories. The Orthodox Story, to which I gave most weight
in my November vote, required a small tightening. The implications of the Alternative Story for policy
were less clear. I concluded that it was essential for the MPC to act in a way that was most likely to
keep inflation expectations anchored. With headline inflation tangibly above target in the run up to the
main, New Year wage bargaining season and with the market clearly expecting that policy would be
tightened, a small increase in Bank Rate was, on balance, warranted to avoid any misperception that
our reaction function had altered.
Strategically, the significance of this account is in the uncertainty injected by structural change; in this
case, from migration. Of course, there is a host of demand-side uncertainties: about consumption,
export growth and so on. But they fit comfortably into the MPC’s framework of producing a conditional
forecast of probability ranges around a central projection. The supply-side uncertainties are something
else – much harder to calibrate and potentially going to how we read and act on the economy.
Inward migration is just the most obvious reason the monetary transmission mechanism might have
altered. In reviewing globalisation more generally, others have described how the short-run
relationship between aggregate demand and inflation may be weakened by firms’ enhanced capacity
to switch production between countries, including via outsourcing, in the face of capacity and cost
pressures.
As policy makers discuss these issues it could become a commonplace that, in such an environment,
central banks would have no choice but to respond more aggressively whenever inflation deviates
from target; that, compared with the past, we would need to make bigger changes in interest rates,
since bigger shifts in demand would be needed to bring inflation back to target. I should make clear
that, as put, I would not go along with this completely. It would all depend on whether medium-term
inflation expectations were well anchored. So long as they were, the central bank would have a wider
choice than a one-item menu of having, putting it crudely, to generate a material downturn in the short
term to contain inflation; or, symmetrically, a boomlet to raise inflation. Another possible choice might
be to tighten (loosen) modestly but for longer, allowing inflation to return to target over a longer

2

BIS Review 2/2007

horizon; and if the policy maker explained the considerations behind the likely path of policy, price and
wage setters might act in a way that helped to bring inflation back to target5. Acting aggressively
without need could endanger the political economy foundations of any central bank’s authority. It has
to be a judgment based on the particular circumstances.
In terms of my central theme this evening, this is a world in which monetary regimes truly are better,
but in which policy makers are having to face some fresh challenges.

Asset pricing uncertainties
If central bankers see possible interruptions to the Great Stability, there is arguably conflicting
evidence as to whether financial markets are giving it insufficient weight or – at the opposite pole –
taking stability for granted.
In an intriguing paper, Ken Rogoff has shown that output and inflation volatility have declined by
considerably more over recent decades than the volatility of returns on a range of financial assets
(Table 1).6 As Rogoff discusses, there could be a number of explanations. Financial markets might
believe that the Great Stability will not last. Or it may be taking them a while to price in lower
macroeconomic volatility. Or the beneficial effects of macroeconomic stability may be being offset by
something else.
In the third category, Rogoff discusses the possibility that, with the lower level of risk-free rates that
have accompanied the Great Stability, a given change in the yield curve now has a bigger
proportionate effect on asset prices. I am not sure this would be my own best bet.
Common v. idiosyncratic volatility
But first, some facts. In the case of equity markets, we need to separate the dominant common (or
macro) component of index returns from that attributable to variability in the firm-specific (or
idiosyncratic) component. Comparing the period from 1980 to 1992 with that since 1992, when
inflation targeting was introduced in the UK, the common component – proxied by the average
correlation between returns on pairs of equity index components – has fallen by around 25%7 (Chart
1). Forward-looking measures, derived from option prices, imply that these pairwise correlations are
not expected to fall much further. All told, this seems consistent with some beneficial effect on asset
volatility from the Great Stability, but with Rogoff’s puzzle intact.
Possible explanations: risk premia
Another vantage point can be gained from decomposing changes in the level of the equity market into
changes in (estimates of) the risk-free rate, projected earnings growth, and the equity risk premium8.
For both the FTSE100 and the S&P, this suggests that the decline in real rates has been an important
driver of the rise in the equity market since the early 1990s, but that the market is not materially more
sensitive to changes in real rates now than it was on average over the past 15-20 years (Chart 2). This
may be because, as part of better monetary policy regimes, risk-free real rates have been slightly less

5

See Woodford, M., 2003, ‘Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy’, Princeton University Press,
Chapter 7; Tucker P M W (2006), ‘Reflections on operating inflation targeting’, speech at the Chicago Graduate School of
Business, May 2005, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Summer 2006, page 217.

6

Rogoff, K. (2006), 'Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy, paper prepared for a symposium on 'The New Economic
Geography: Effects and Policy Implications', Jackson Hole Wyoming August 2006.

7

As for the volatility in individual-firm equity returns, some extreme episodes aside (for example, the 1987 Crash), the firmspecific component inevitably dominates. For the UK market, the common component seems to have fallen slightly, on
average, since 1992. The idiosyncratic component rose during the second half of the 1990s, but then fell back. On the face
of it, that would seem to square with the dotcom/telecom boom and bust. At least for the UK market, it does not obviously
lend support to the suggestion in some earlier papers that there may have been an underlying increase in idiosyncratic
volatility. For example, see Campbell J, M Lettau, B G Malkiel and Y Xu (2001), ‘Have individual stocks become more
volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosynchratic risk’, Journal of Finance, vol 56, no. 1 pp 1-43, which covered the period
from 1962 to 1996 for the US market.

8

Using a Dividend Discount Model. Further information on the Dividend Discount Model can be found in Panigirtzoglou N.
and R. Scammell (2002), ‘Analysts’ earnings forecasts and equity valuations’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring
2002, pp 59-6.

BIS Review 2/2007

3

volatile than in the past. Another candidate explanation is related to the possibility that the other
component of the discount rate – the equity risk premium – may have risen since the late 1990s. If, as
a result, the overall discount rate were broadly unchanged, a given shift in the default-free curve would
not necessarily have a greater proportionate effect on equity prices than in past decades.
Indeed, a bigger question would seem to be how to square the possibility of a rise in the equity risk
premium with apparent falls, since the turn of the century, in term premia on default-free government
bond yields and in credit risk premia across a wide range of assets. It must be cautioned that the true
equity risk premium is unobservable, and so estimates may well be wide of the mark. But there is a
possible story, related to changes in the global distribution and management of savings. The
managers of the now massive official foreign exchange reserves in Asia have a clear preference for
fixed-income securities, both absolutely and relative to say the US household sector. And in the West,
defined-benefit pension fund trustees and managers have been placing greater weight on matching
the duration of their quasi-fixed income liabilities with holdings of bonds. In both cases, there may
have been a de facto shift in global demand from equities to fixed-income securities of various kinds.
That would tend to alter relative risk premia9.
All told, this seems to reduce the candidate explanations for Rogoff’s puzzle. For equities, fluctuations
in equity risk premia may have been a factor, driven by the dotcom/telecom fad and shifts in global
investor preferences. For financial assets more generally, perhaps the best provisional view is that
volatility in asset returns may have been elevated for a while by the effect on prices of the reductions
in default-free rates, term premia and credit-risk premia associated with the Great Stability. As well as
adding to volatility temporarily, that will also have raised ex post returns, in which case it would be
important that market participants did not act on the basis that they were easily sustainable.
Forward-looking uncertainty
This is where my own second puzzle kicks in: whilst we can busy ourselves trying to identify why
realised asset price volatility has not fallen more over the past decade, central bankers seem to
expend quite a lot more energy worrying about the low level of future volatility implied by options on a
range of financial assets.
So, on the one hand, members of my community variously enumerate risks from low risk premia and
the Search for Yield; global imbalances; energy prices; household balance sheets and house prices in
a number of countries; releveraging of the corporate sector via Leveraged Buy Outs; flatter Phillips
Curves; and so on10. On the other hand, implied volatilities derived from options, with a range of expiry
dates, on long-term yields, equities, and exchange rates are all well below levels around the turn of the
century (Chart 3). And in recent months, at least for short expiry options, they have dipped below the
averages for the first part of the 1990s.
But implied volatilities may not be the best measure of the market’s forward-looking assessment of
risks. They represent one standard deviation (sd) in the market’s underlying probability distribution,
whereas arguably central bankers are worrying about greater-than-one-standard deviation events. The
market’s assessment of such risks can perhaps be gauged by looking at how much of the current
option-implied distributions lie beyond one sd compared with option markets in the past, and with
historical outturns.
For bonds and equities, a little bit more of the probability mass implied by options11 is currently in the
lower tail (beyond one standard deviation) than is the case over fairly long-runs of historical outturns12
(Table 2). But for equities, bonds, and dollar exchange rates, the lower probability mass is pretty well
in line with the average ‘tail’ implied by options markets in the past (Charts 4 - 5). That does not
suggest much sensitivity to the various risks preoccupying the official sector.

9

This is a different point from that, advocated for example by Chairman Bernanke, explaining a fall in long-maturity risk-free
rates in terms of an ex ante imbalance of global savings and investment. The two explanations are not mutually exclusive,
as the observed fall in yields on indexed government bonds could reflect a combination of a fall in the risk-free rate and falls
in term premia.

10

For example see Bank of England Financial Stability Report, Overview, July 2006, pp 5-13 and Bank of England Inflation
Report, November 2006, Chapter 5.

11

Using three-month expiry options.

12

Since the 1930s for equities; 1960s for bonds; and 1970s for exchange rates.

4

BIS Review 2/2007

Market contacts offer various explanations for this – some of them, I should make clear, sceptically.
One – and here bear in mind my earlier remarks – is that not much really nasty will happen given the
collective wisdom of the world’s monetary authorities. Another is that, in an environment where
investors are chasing yield, collecting the premium income from writing options has become a
prevalent way of sustaining returns in the hope that nothing too bad happens; and that if it does,
today’s liquid capital markets will contain the volatility anyway. In other words, they base their
explanation on what has been going in the financial system.

Financial system uncertainties
Big, perhaps fundamental, changes have been underway in banking and capital markets for a few
years now, with implications for how we gauge money and credit conditions, and assess the resilience
of the financial system as a whole.
Discussions typically jump to the second, financial stability issue. But I want to look first at some
monetary indicators in the light of these structural changes.
Broad money growth
As has recently attracted a good deal of attention, UK broad money is up around 15% on a year ago,
and more than 25% since the beginning of 2005 – much more than elsewhere in the G7 (Chart 6). Of
this increase, almost half – or around £140bn – is accounted for by the money holdings of so-called
Other Financial Corporations13. Central bankers have to ask whether that represents a threat to
inflation and stability or, rather, a shift in the demand for money that is a symptom of structural change
in the financial system.
There is relatively little research on the macroeconomic significance of OFC money.14 The central
question is typically seen as whether institutional investors, such as pension funds and life insurance
companies, are holding an unusually large amount of money in their asset portfolios, in which case
any ‘excess’ might be expected sooner or later to flow into financial markets, pushing up asset values,
which in turn would tend to boost aggregate demand and so add to inflationary pressures.
Well, since 2003, institutional investor M4 has accounted for less than a fifth of the near doubling in
total OFC money holdings. And the share of money in their asset portfolios has remained in a 3-5%
range (Chart 7). Moreover, some contacts have suggested that with pension funds and life companies
making greater use of derivatives to manufacture long-duration assets, some cash is now held to
manage collateral calls or to generate a LIBOR-based stream of payments. Such money holdings
would not be readily available to invest in financial assets.
Over the past year, the largest contributions to OFC money growth have, in fact, come from two other
groups (Chart 8): “securities dealers and other” (8pp)15; and what the statisticians label “Other
Financial Intermediaries” (contributing a whopping 17 pp).
I would hazard a guess that a significant portion of the money holdings of securities dealers stems
from their so-called ‘matched’ repo books. Although technically these entail secured deposits with
banks, they are not money holdings that get spent (on assets or goods), and are matched pretty well
by secured (repo) loans to other parts of the financial system.
The ‘OFI’ category is somewhat amorphous, including for example both private equity funds and
Special Purpose Vehicles. Collectively, their holdings of bank deposits have been growing at an
annual rate of over 40% for the past two years. It is extremely difficult to judge the macroeconomic
significance of this, not least because no breakdown is available of the money holdings of different
types of ‘OFI’. On the one hand, it may be uninvested cash, reflecting for example the wave of fund
raising by the private equity industry. That is most definitely cash to be invested in the equity market,
but such fund raisings are highly publicised and conceivably may already have been discounted in

13

‘Other’ in the sense of not being a member of the monetary sector (commercial banks and building societies).

14

Chrystal K A and P Mizen (2001), ‘Other financial corporations: Cinderella or ugly sister of empirical monetary economics’,
Bank of England Working Paper, No. 151.

15

The other intermediaries grouped with securities dealers include financial leasing companies and bank holding companies.

BIS Review 2/2007

5

equity prices via M&A speculation. As for SPVs, they are used for all sorts of purposes. Some effect
transactions within banking groups, and should ideally be netted off. Some are used for
securitisations, where investors obtain returns linked to the credit risk on a portfolio of assets. Regular
cash-market securitisations, with a full transfer of the underlying assets, shrink bank balance sheets.
But synthetic securitisations, which have become prevalent over the past couple of years, can involve
increased money holdings16. It is not obvious that such deposits would be of macroeconomic
significance over and above any effect on asset prices/risk premia stemming from the prior associated
demand for (synthetic) credit.
But we should pause before concluding firmly that the money data are benign. First, their counterpart,
bank lending, has been growing at around 15% (although the 3-month annualised rate is somewhat
lower). Second, the money holdings of non-financial companies have recently been rising rapidly,
perhaps signalling on upside risk to the outlook for business investment in an environment of robust
profits and aggregate demand.
Third, looking at UK OFC money may be too narrow if we are trying to assess whether there is an
upside risk to asset prices, and so to aggregate demand, from money growth. Given that asset prices
are today determined in global capital markets, global rather than domestic money (and credit) growth
may be just as relevant. On one measure, the rate of growth of ‘world’ broad money17 has slowed from
around 15% to around 8% since 2003 (Chart 9), perhaps consistent with the gradual withdrawal of
monetary accommodation in the US and elsewhere. However, the treatment of OFCs varies a lot
across the G718, and so their data are not strictly comparable with the UK M4 numbers. More
important, so far as I can tell, most current calculations of world money growth19 simply add up
domestic money supplies, and so leave out cross-border money holdings. That might be a material
omission. For example, external holdings of sterling deposits with the UK banking system have
increased by more than domestic money since the late 1990s; and by around 15% over the past year.
How much of this growth is attributable to non-bank financial groups, whether based in the UK or
overseas, is not known.
Like much of the monetary analysis of the early 1980s, I fear that this is rather inconclusive, other than
underlining that one has to get one’s hands dirty in analysing the money numbers. It is plausible that a
decent chunk of recent UK M4 growth should be seen in the light of structural change in the financial
system. Essentially, some types of non-bank financial intermediation have become more significant,
and seem to have entailed higher money holdings on the definitions currently employed. If so, recent
OFC money growth does not of itself obviously have malign implications for money spending and
inflation.
Originate and distribute: what’s going on on bank balance sheets?
Much of the debate about this renewed process of disintermediation has revolved around whether the
burgeoning growth of, for example, structured credit vehicles and hedge funds increases or impairs
the resilience of the system. This is equivalent to asking about the significance to stability of the
pronounced shift in the business model of many large banks to ‘originate and distribute’. If they are not
holding on to the loans and other assets they originate, one might draw the inference that bank
balance sheets would have shrunk.
Nothing could be further from the truth. The balance sheets of the largest and most complex financial
institutions (LCFIs) have ballooned. Both in the US and in Europe (including the UK), their holdings of
equities and of debt instruments (bonds and loans) have grown more rapidly than the underlying
markets (Chart 10). That does not exactly look like disintermediation.

16

In a synthetic securitisation, the SPV still issues ‘cash’ securities to its investors, but rather than investing the proceeds in
the credit portfolio, it holds a high-quality liquid asset, which can be a bank deposit. It gains its credit exposure via a credit
default swap. In a recent speech, RG Rajan of the IMF attributed the compression in risk premia to a shortage of assets.
The growth in demand for synthetic exposures is consistent with that. Rajan, R G (2006), ‘Is there a global shortage of fixed
assets?’ remarks at the G-30 meetings in New York, December 2006.

17

World broad money is a weighted average of individual country M2 or closest national substitute, using market exchange
rates.

18

Included in the Euro area; partly included in Japan; excluded in the US.

19

See box on ‘Excess global liquidity, asset prices and inflation, Bank of England Inflation Report, February 2006, page 5.

6

BIS Review 2/2007

How to square this with ‘originate and distribute’? Basically, in contrast to the pre-Big Bang world in
the UK, today’s prevailing business model entails a significant commitment of capital by investment
banks. This manifests itself in a wide range of on-balance sheet assets on top of the more traditional
bond and equity books held as part of ‘market making’. For example, bridge loans are extended to
finance Leveraged Buy-Outs prior to more permanent debt instruments being placed via the capital
markets. Similarly, there is an intermediate stage between origination and distribution of securitised
portfolios, during which they are warehoused on banks’ balance sheets. As I just described, synthetic
securitisations, by contrast, can involve investment banks permanently holding corporate bonds and
loans to hedge synthetic short positions, where the risk is transferred elsewhere. And loans against a
very wide range of collateral are provided to finance hedge funds20; this effectively amounts to writing
deeply out-of-the-money options, where the risk flows back to the financer in adverse states of the
world21.
So investment banking does use balance sheets, but in non-traditional ways. Beyond that, there is an
extra ingredient for the commercial banks. As is apparent from the money numbers, they are very
much still in the deposit-gathering business. On top of maintaining their central role in the payments
system, this means that, even if operating an ‘originate and distribute’ model in their investment
banking business, commercial banks still have substantial funds to employ in asset portfolios. This can
be achieved in a number of ways: for example, holding onto originated assets, buying assets after they
have been securitised by other banks, or entering the principal investment business. All three are
underway to a greater or lesser degree. In the UK, until quite recently large banks probably held on to
more loans than their peer group22. In the US and parts of Continental Europe, the commercial
banking sector acquired massive portfolios of securitised assets in the first half of the decade, possibly
diversifying sectoral or geographical exposures. And a range of banks have been entering or reentering the principal investment business.
What to make of all this? Well it certainly underlines the difficulty of using the growth or composition of
bank balance sheets as the sole basis for judging credit conditions. With so much credit distributed
and traded via capital markets, quantity data have to be put alongside prices (yield spreads) and,
ideally, qualitative information. It is in that context that the Bank is planning to introduce a formal
survey of credit conditions next year. This important initiative is designed to help us get behind the
money and credit data.
A second, rather obvious and by now familiar conclusion is that, in a narrow sense, it may have
become more difficult to identify where risk resides, although we should not make too much of that as
interest rate, currency and equity risk has been transferred around the financial system via derivatives
for almost two decades. For me, it is more interesting that, in big picture terms, many banks have in
effect concluded that they are better at, or will be better rewarded for, managing market risk – and its
sister, counterparty credit risk – than managing ‘buy and hold’ credit risk; and that if they are going to
hold illiquid assets, they should provide a higher return than bog-standard loans.
This suggests that stability relies on the liquidity of capital markets – primary as well as secondary
markets – proving durable under stress. Indeed, contacts suggest that one of their main worries is that
something – they don’t know what – could cause primary markets to shut for a few months, leaving
them holding loans and warehoused portfolios needing to be marked down over quarterly reporting
dates. Another theme is reliance on secondary markets to shed complex forms of market risk,
especially when it is hard to be confident about the robustness of correlation assumptions incorporated
into some pricing models and risk measures. Although there is a spectrum of opinion, many take
encouragement from the way the system has weathered a series of shocks in recent years, including
lately the Amaranth episode. Its non-energy portfolios were liquidated smoothly; prime brokers largely
released the resulting ‘excess collateral’ in a timely manner; and other parts of the hedge fund industry
provided a pool of capital to take on the risk in the natural gas contracts. I would not want to play that
down but, inevitably, some caution may be warranted too. Amaranth’s ability to build up highly

20

Synthetic financing, via eg Total Return Swaps, does not show on bank/dealer balance sheets beyond any net mark-tomarket derivative exposure.

21

In really adverse states of the world, collateral values would not cover all of the bank/dealer’s exposure, and the net asset
value of the hedge fund would have fallen too.

22

‘Private equity: a discussion of risk and regulatory engagement’, Financial Services Authority Discussion Paper No. 06/6,
November 2006.

BIS Review 2/2007

7

concentrated positions in centrally cleared markets was a reminder of some earlier lessons, dating
back to the 1987 stock market crash23, about the detection of large trader positions. More generally,
this year’s Counterparty Risk Management Group Report, produced by a group of leading
practitioners, identified a range of issues for the industry to tackle.

Macro and financial market uncertainty
As will have been apparent, the issues I have been discussing are not really separable. There are, to
be clear, a lot of reasons for confidence in monetary and financial stability being sustained. Monetary
regimes are much improved. Banks are generally regarded as well capitalised. Innovation has enabled
risk to be dispersed more widely, including outside the banking sector. And capital markets are
deeper.
Nevertheless, it is a potential concern that, looking forward, financial markets may not be pricing for –
which means that investors may not be insuring themselves against – the range of uncertainties that
preoccupy the official sector. Maybe the official sector is wrong. Or may be there is an underestimation
of risks in the market, perhaps associated with the widely discussed Search for Yield, and possibly
also with overconfidence in the capacity of monetary authorities or liquid capital markets to smooth out
all shocks.
This poses three questions. Whether the risks will crystallise. Whether, if they were to, any such
crystallisation would be orderly or disorderly in financial markets. And whether if asset markets were
disorderly, that would feed back into the financial system in ways that both seriously amplified the
adjustment and created serious threats to systemic stability.
I fear that the answers are unknowable. But the task for central banks is nevertheless clear enough.
Working with our partners in regulatory organisations and in other central banks, we must seek to
understand today’s global banking system and capital markets well enough to tell the difference, if and
when called upon to do so, between a problem requiring solely a macroeconomic policy response and
a more complex financial stability problem. And, most important of all, central banks must strive to
maintain the medium-term credibility of monetary policy, as an essential pre-condition for the stability
in which both the real and financial economy can thrive. Not pretending that the world is simpler or
safer than the reality is one small part of that endeavour.

23

8

See, for example, the US Brady Report, and the report of the Hong Kong Securities Review Committee, 1987.

BIS Review 2/2007

Table 1: Macroeconomic and asset price annual volatility

UK GDP
US GDP

1951-59 1960-69 1970-79 1980-91 1992-2005
1.5
1.6
2.2
2.3
0.9
3.3

UK Inflation (1)

Percentage change
between 60-69 and 92-05
-41.8

Percentage change
between 80-91 and 92-05
-59

1.7

2.5

2.5

1.1

-36.4

-56

1.5

5.5

3.4

1.0

-34

-72

US Inflation

1.8

1.2

2.0

2.3

0.5

-55

-76

S&P 500 (2)

14.0

15.7

19.1

12.0

15.2

-3

27

20.4

43.3

12.1

15.2

-25

26

5.4

7.8

15.4

9.6

78

-38

3.1

11.2

7.7

4.9

57

-36

£ ERI (5)

6.9

4.5

2.3

-49

$ ERI (5)

5.4

4.4

2.9

-34

Yen ERI (5)

9.9

4.3

4.0

-8

€ ERI (5)

1.8

3.0

3.0

-3

FTSE All Share (2)(3)
10-year UST (2)

3.4

10-year UK gilt (2)(4)

Notes:
1. UK inflation is consumption deflator inflation; 1960-69 includes 1956-59
2. Nominal returns deflated by consumption deflators.
3. FTSE All Share starts in 1962
4. 1960-69 includes 1956-59
5. Trade weighted real exchange rate indices start in 1975
4. Volatility is calculated as standard deviation of annual growth rates.
5. UST and UK gilts are based on total return indices from Global Financial Database

Chart 1: Average pairwise correlation between historical returns of FTSE 100 constituents

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Jan-84

Jun-89

Dec-94

Jun-00

Nov-05

Source: Bank of England

BIS Review 2/2007

9

Chart 2: DDM Sensitivity of S&P 500 to a 1pp increase in the risk-free real interest rate
Per cent change in
S&P500

(Fixed, exogeneous real dividend growth rate of

-20.0
-25.0
-30.0

Average

-35.0
-40.0
-45.0
-50.0
991

1994

1997

2000

2003

2006

Chart 3: Equity index 3-month option-implied volatility

Per cent
80.0

60.0

S&P 500

FTSE 100
40.0

20.0

0.0
1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

2004

Source: Bank of England

Table 2: Probability masses in financial asset option-implied and historical distributions
Asset
USD per GBP
JPY per USD
USD per EUR
SP500
10-y UST

Tail
upper ($ negative)
lower ($ negative)
upper ($ negative)
lower
lower (10y yield negative)

Option-implied tail

Historical tail

Historical period

15
15
15
15
15

16
16
14
11
10

1971-2006
1971-2006
1971-2006
1931-2006
1960-2006

Source: Bank of England

10

BIS Review 2/2007

Chart 4: S&P 500 returns: probability in lower implied pdf tail more than one standard
deviation from the mean (3-month horizon)
Per cent

18.0
17.5
17.0
16.5
16.0
15.5
15.0
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005
Source: Bank of England

Chart 5: JPYUSD: probability in lower implied pdf tail more than one standard deviation from
the mean (3-month horizon)
Per cent

(downside risk for dollar)

16.0
15.5
15.0
14.5
14.0
13.5
13.0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006
Source: Bank of England

Chart 6: Broad money across industrialized countries

% change oya
16.0

UK

14.0
12.0

US

10.0
8.0

Euro-area

6.0

Japan

4.0
2.0
0.0

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

BIS Review 2/2007

11

Chart 7: Pension fund and insurance company money holdings as a share of total
financial assets

Percentages of ICPF assets
8.0
St erling deposit s

7.0

M4

6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1987

1990

1993

1996

1999

2002

2005

Chart 8: OFC’s M4 growth by sub-sector

Percentage points

OFAs

40.0
35.0
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
-5.0
-10.0
-15.0

OFIs
Securit ies dealers and ot hers
Inst it ut ional invest ors
OFCs M4 growt h

1999

12

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

BIS Review 2/2007

Chart 9: World broad money (M2) growth (individual country M2 (or nearest equivalent)
weighted by market exchange rates
Per cent
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

-2

Chart 10: LCFI's debt held for trading versus representative indices

Index 31/12/2000 = 100
300
US LCFIs' Debt Holdings
European LCFIs' Debt Holdings
Global Broad Market Corporat e Index
Mort gage-Backed Securit ies Index
Asset -Backed Securit ies Index

250
200
150
100
50

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Source: SEC Filings, Published Accounts and Merrill Lynch.
BNP Paribas excluded due to lack of H1 interim data.

BIS Review 2/2007

13

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Birmingham Chamber of
Commerce Annual Banquet, Birmingham, 23 January 2007.
*

*

*

Lord Mayor, Lady Mayoress, President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Two weeks ago your Chamber of Commerce called on the Bank of England to take manufacturing
more seriously when it sets interest rates. In arguing against an interest rate rise, the Birmingham
Chamber said, “we would urge the Bank of England to once again consider the effects this will have
on the beleaguered manufacturing sector”. It will not have escaped your attention that Bank Rate did
rise in January and has now increased by 75 basis points since the beginning of August. So tonight I
want to explain why the Monetary Policy Committee took that action, and why the Bank believes that
the control of inflation is essential for the success of Birmingham – and all British – manufacturing.
Last week we learnt that inflation, as measured by the Consumer Prices Index, was 3% in December,
the highest level since the Monetary Policy Committee was set up almost ten years ago. If it rises by
one further decimal point to 3.1%, I shall have to write an open letter to the Chancellor explaining why
inflation has risen to more than one percentage point above the target of 2%, and what measures the
Committee are taking to bring inflation back to target.
RPI inflation has risen to 4.4%, the highest rate since December 1991. And RPIX inflation – the target
which governed our decisions until December 2003 – has risen to 3.8%, which would have triggered a
letter under the old target.
In 1997, I suggested that “Given past experience of inflation volatility, it is likely, even allowing for the
change in policy regime, that the MPC will have many opportunities to restore the lost art of letter
writing to British life”. It is really very surprising that no opportunity has yet arisen. As I stressed back
then, it is important to understand – and many commentators seem to misunderstand – that the
inflation target is not a range of 1-3%, but a target of 2% at which the Monetary Policy Committee
continually aims.
So an inflation rate of 3.1% is simply a trigger for a public explanation of why inflation has risen above
target and what the Committee proposes to do about it. Letter writing is a key part of the accountability
provisions of the monetary policy framework created in 1997, and I would welcome the chance to
demonstrate how the process is meant to work. The opportunity to write to the Chancellor did not arise
last week. But since we are so close to the level that would trigger a letter, let me instead write a letter
to you.
Over the past year CPI inflation has risen by a percentage point, from around 2% to 3%. That was not
the Committee’s expectation a year ago when it believed the most likely outcome was for inflation to
stay around 2%. And at that point many commentators were predicting cuts in interest rates in 2006.
So what happened? Part of the story has been a further sharp rise in energy prices during 2006. But it
is only a part. It is impossible to be sure what explains the rest of this unexpected drift up in inflation.
But three factors seem to be relevant.
First, the historically low level of interest rates and rapid growth of money and credit have contributed
to rising asset prices and buoyant nominal spending, not just in the UK but around the industrialised
world. Spending and capacity pressures in the UK economy recovered from the slowdown in 2005
faster than many had expected.
Second, and a direct consequence of the first, is that inflation expectations have risen. Firms have
been able to raise prices a little faster than before with the expectation that now those increases would
stick. As the Birmingham Chamber’s own recent quarterly survey showed – “over half of the City’s
manufacturers were intending to increase prices in the next three months”. One of the reasons for the
success of inflation targeting is the anchor which it gives to inflation expectations. But, when inflation
moves away from target, we must prevent the anchor from dragging. Expectations need to be firmly
fixed on the 2% target.
Third, increasing cost pressures have made it more difficult to sustain profit margins without raising
prices. Energy and import prices are one source of higher costs. Another is the cost of employing
labour which has been rising faster than the growth of real take-home pay. Higher pension costs for

BIS Review 9/2007

1

companies, on the one hand, and higher taxes, petrol and utility prices for employees, on the other,
have opened up a gap between increases in the pay bill and real take-home pay. If investment and
employment growth are to be maintained, the burden of these higher costs must either be passed
back in the form of reduced input costs or forward as higher prices. So far, pay pressures have been
subdued, but not sufficiently so to mitigate the rise in costs to employers. As a result, companies have
scaled back their demand for labour and looked to raise prices.
The risks to money spending, inflation expectations and cost pressures were not overlooked by the
MPC and were explicitly identified as upside risks to inflation both in speeches and in our monthly
minutes back in 2005. In the event, the upside risks to inflation did materialise to some extent. And a
year ago, the MPC thought the risks to GDP growth were on the downside. Yet, the total output of the
UK, leaving to one side the energy sector, has been rising at an annual rate of over 3%. And over the
past month some of the key spending and activity indicators have been strong.
The balance of risks to output growth and inflation has shifted towards the upside. As those risks
began to materialise, the MPC acted.
The Committee started to raise interest rates to deal with the changing balance of risks last August,
and has now raised rates by 75bp in total to keep inflation on track to hit the target. But, by responding
early to changes in the inflation outlook, the MPC ultimately needs to raise interest rates by less than
would be the case if we delayed.
Looking forward, some of the factors responsible for the pick up in inflation through 2006 are likely to
unwind during 2007. Oil prices have fallen by around a third since August, and will feed through to
petrol and utility prices. The rise in the exchange rate will dampen the impact of higher import prices.
It is also important not to exaggerate the effect of stronger demand on inflation. As we pointed out in
our November Inflation Report, the ability to recruit migrant labour continues to offer a safety-valve for
demand pressures in the economy, and is, no doubt, in some part responsible for the continued muted
level of wage pressures. That is a particular help in present circumstances, and has reduced the
extent to which interest rates have needed to rise.
But how quickly and by how much inflation will fall over the next year or so is difficult to judge. Falls in
some important prices, such as petrol and utility charges, mean that people will have more disposable
incomes to spend on other goods and services. That may encourage producers of those goods and
services to raise prices. Equally, companies will be under less pressure to reduce other costs,
affecting their response to upward pressures on earnings growth. The Committee will be monitoring
carefully the outcomes month by month. All I can say is that the Committee’s central view remains that
inflation is likely to fall back in the second half of the year, possibly quite sharply.
As ever, there are risks around that central view – in both directions. Some of the biggest risks
surround energy prices, supply factors such as migration, the level of asset prices, and the extent to
which inflation expectations will prove to be a fixed or dragging anchor. Pay growth is also important.
As I said earlier, if investment and employment growth are to be maintained, the burden of higher
costs on employers must either be passed back in the form of lower input costs or forward as higher
prices. All of us – whether on the shop floor, in the board room, or in the public sector – are coming to
terms with the fact that those higher costs imply a temporary, but only a temporary, slowing in the
growth of our real take-home pay. That adjustment – difficult but inevitable – will be helped by the fall
in energy prices since last autumn. But the belief that we could avoid the adjustment by pushing up
our pay would lead to a self-defeating process of higher wages offset by higher prices. It is the task of
the MPC to ensure that the process of adjustment does not lead to a persistent rise in inflation.
Bank Rate was raised in order that inflation will come back to its 2% target, and future action will
depend upon how those risks to the inflation outlook materialise.
The month by month path of interest rates required to bring inflation back to target is a matter of
judgment. There is certainly room for reasonable people to disagree about the level or timing of
changes in interest rates. There is no absolute truth here, and it is vital that the MPC keeps an open
mind at all times.
That in essence is my letter to you and all the members of the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce.
Achieving the inflation target is, I believe, in the long-run interest of manufacturing no less than the rest
of the economy. I recognise that the burden of changes in interest rates often falls disproportionately
on manufacturers and other exporters as increases in interest rates push up the sterling exchange
rate. And that comes on top of a secular decline – fifty years ago almost 40% of GDP was produced

2

BIS Review 9/2007

by the manufacturing sector. Today that share is around 14%. But the continued relative decline of
manufacturing – and indeed the strength of sterling – over the past decade or so reflects, not the
stance of monetary policy, but the remarkable wind of change that has blown across the world
economy with the advent of China, India and much of the former Soviet Union into the world trading
system. To their great credit, business people and politicians have not resisted changes to the
structure of the British economy, unlike many of their counterparts abroad. As a result, total output and
employment here have grown rapidly, and our living standards are higher than could have been
sustained with policies aimed to defend the old industrial structure.
Those changes, however, have led to the closure of many manufacturing companies. There are over a
million fewer people employed in manufacturing now than a decade ago, and 200,000 fewer in the
West Midlands. It is just over a hundred years since car production started at Longbridge, just over
thirty years since it was nationalised, and no vehicle has been built there for over a year. But there are
also many success stories. Since I became Governor, I have made regular monthly visits to the
regions and countries of the United Kingdom, and visited around one hundred companies, large and
small, new and old. I have been impressed by how they have focussed on products in which they can
add value and exploit their comparative advantage – whether a company in Northern Ireland exporting
wall heaters to the newly rich of Shanghai and Beijing, a manufacturer in the North-West exploiting a
patent for paint which is resistant to very high temperatures, or a company in the Potteries passionate
about the plates they make for the hotel and restaurant trade. And if you want a digger, why look
further than a JCB? Proof that vehicle assembly in the West Midlands can be successful.
All of them – as all of you – are working in a highly competitive environment. It is indeed much harder
to run a business than to run a central bank. But seeing those companies at first hand has made me
even more convinced that our duty is to ensure that you do not experience the macroeconomic
instabilities of the past and that we keep inflation on track to meet our 2% target. Stability is in your
interest just as much as mine.
Speeches on monetary policy rarely whet the appetite for a good meal, and I apologise for that before
the splendid dinner your Chamber is about to serve. But tonight has been an opportunity to share our
analysis of the economic situation with you. I hope you will understand the reasons behind our
decisions to raise interest rates over recent months, even if it goes against the grain to support them.
Long before I became Governor I said that my ambition was for monetary policy to be boring. You may
feel that the latest decision was far from boring. But while it is true that the precise timing was
unexpected by analysts, the direction in which interest rates were heading was predictable in terms of
the underlying economic data, and indeed was quite clearly predicted – financial markets were
anticipating a 25 basis point rise at the February meeting. Looking behind the stunned surprise in the
headlines, much of the reaction to our latest decision was that it was only too clear why rates needed
to be raised. As one paper wrote last week, “while the timing of last week’s rate rise caught many
commentators on the hop, the reasoning behind the move is not at all a surprise”.
So I have certainly not abandoned my ambition to be boring. The basis for our prosperity is business.
And the excitement in the economy will, I hope, continue to come from your businesses, your new
products and ventures. After all, the MPC is there to make inflation, and hence the economy as a
whole, more stable. It’s up to you to steal the limelight and the headlines from us.

BIS Review 9/2007

3

Rachel Lomax: The MPC comes of age
Lecture by Ms Rachel Lomax, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at De Montfort University,
Leicester, 28 February 2007.
I am very grateful to Gareth Ramsay for his help in preparing this speech, and also James Proudman, Tony Yates and other
Bank colleagues for their help in preparing this speech, and to a number of colleagues at the Bank of England for useful
comments.

*
1

*

*

Introduction

It’s a great pleasure to be in Leicester tonight, particularly given my long association with De Montfort
University, as a Governor.
Tonight I want to focus my remarks on the Monetary Policy Committee, which is ten years old this
year. This is a blink of an eye in the life of the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street as she approaches
313. But UK monetary policy frameworks have lived dangerously and died young. For them, ten years
is good going. To mark the occasion the Treasury Committee has launched a special enquiry. An
impressive weight of written evidence has already been published, including a detailed review by the
Bank of England.
Everyone agrees that the UK has experienced an unprecedented degree of economic stability over
the past decade. The average rate of inflation has come down from nearly 10% in the seventies and
eighties, to 2.5% since 1993, and the volatility of inflation has fallen very sharply. At the same time,
output growth has been higher on average and less volatile. 1 The change has been stunning. To be
fair though, it predates the formation of the MPC by several years; and other countries have
experienced a similar, if not so pronounced, improvement in performance.
There is considerable agreement that better monetary policy is partly responsible for this better
outcome, though there is an ongoing debate about exactly how much was also due to unusually
benign global economic conditions, including the impact of globalisation.
Whatever the outcome of that debate, we clearly cannot bank on a trouble-free future. But we can and
should look hard at the way our current monetary policy framework is operating, to give it the best
chance of coping, if necessary, with a harsher climate. So tonight I want to consider what was so
special about the MPC; and ten years on, ask how age and success has changed it; and what we can
do to preserve its youthful vigour.

2

Historical background

The MPC has come to personify the monetary policy framework that was put in place when Gordon
Brown made the Bank of England independent in 1997. But by monetary policy frameworks, I mean
the broader set of rules and procedures for taking decisions about interest rates.
Prior to 1992, such frameworks often took the form of a commitment to maintain a fixed exchange
rate, most recently as a member of the ERM. But these proved hard to sustain – sterling was
repeatedly devalued, at great political cost to the Government of the day. Perhaps the most
controversial frameworks took the form of commitments to meet targets for the growth in the money
supply. These were meant to act as rules, which would tie the hands of politicians, but they proved
ineffective, not least because the underlying economic relationships broke down. There were also
periods – notably the 1970s – when there was no discernible monetary policy framework at all; when
monetary policy was in eclipse and Governments relied on incomes polices to control inflation. These,
too, were a dismal failure.

1

Inflation has averaged 2.5% since 1997, with a standard deviation of 0.8%. In the two decades to 1992, it averaged 9.6%,
with a standard deviation of some 5.6%. Over the past decade, output has grown steadily, averaging 2.8%, with a standard
deviation of 0.7%, compared with an average of 2% and a standard deviation of 2.5% over the seventies and eighties.

BIS Review 20/2007

1

All these frameworks suffered from one of two basic problems. They either lacked credibility, or they
lacked sufficient flexibility for policy-makers to respond intelligently to events. So it is little surprise that
they were associated with two decades of poor macroeconomic performance.
Sterling’s exit from ERM in the autumn of 1992 led to an overhaul in the way monetary policy was
conducted, with the adoption of an explicit target for inflation, and a number of moves to make the
process of policy-making more transparent through the publication of minutes of what was popularly
known as the Ken and Eddie show, and a new Inflation Report, produced by the Bank.

3

What was special about the 1997 arrangements?

In the event, 1992 marked a break with the past. But while the policy innovations of the 1993-97 years
were showing promise, the framework remained relatively informal. And decisions about interest rates
stayed in the hands of the Chancellor.
The change in Government in 1997 led to a far-reaching effort to institutionalise and depoliticise
monetary policy arrangements. A new Bank of England Act stipulated that the objective of monetary
policy should be domestic price stability, and only ‘subject to that’ to support the Government’s
objectives for output and employment. The Act left responsibility for setting an annual remit for inflation
in the hands of the Chancellor; but it gave the Bank ‘operational independence’ to set interest rates to
meet this target. Interest rate decisions were to be taken by Committee of nine, which was to include
four appropriately qualified external members.
With these changes, the UK had a fully articulated, credible domestic monetary policy framework,
underpinned by statute, which gave the Bank, through the Monetary Policy Committee, an
independent role in meeting an explicit inflation target.
What was the defining characteristic of this approach to policy, and other broadly contemporary
frameworks developed by countries like Canada, New Zealand and Sweden? The best short answer is
encapsulated in a term originally coined in 1997 by two US academics, Ben Bernanke and Frederick
Mishkin (now Chair and member of the FOMC respectively). It is ‘constrained discretion’ 2 .
Bernanke described this as “an approach that allows monetary policy-makers considerable leeway in
responding to economic shocks, financial disturbances, and other unforeseen developments.
Importantly, however, this discretion of policy-makers is constrained by a strong commitment to
keeping inflation low and stable.” 3
In the UK, the Government is constrained by the institutional framework, which is set in statute. And
the MPC is constrained by the need to meet the inflation target. But while the MPC are told what to do,
they are not told how to do it. At the operational level, there is a lot of discretion.
The commitment to meet the inflation target is fundamental, as a matter of law and economics. As
long as it is credible, such a commitment will help to anchor people’s expectations about future
inflation, and stabilise their response to unexpected shocks. But the scope to exercise discretion about
how long temporary inflation disturbances will be tolerated is critically important too, for the
performance and long term credibility of the framework. Of course it must be used with integrity –
saying one thing and doing another, for short term advantage, is toxic.
This approach was reflected in the Open Letter procedure, which was an explicit part of the 1997
arrangements. This recognised that the MPC would not attempt to bring inflation back to the target
immediately following a large shock, but required the Governor to write a letter to the Chancellor if, as
a result, inflation deviated from the (then) 2.5% target by more than one percentage point.
As Ed Balls commented in a lecture in 2001 4 :

2

“Inflation Targeting: A new framework for monetary policy?”, Ben Bernanke and Frederic Mishkin, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 1997.

3

“Constrained Discretion and Monetary Policy”, remarks by Ben Bernanke before the Money Marketeers of NY University,
New York, February 2003.

4

“Delivering Economic Stability”, Oxford Business Alumni Annual Lecture by Ed Balls, June 2001.

2

BIS Review 20/2007

“Some have assumed it [the requirement to write an open letter] exists for the Chancellor to discipline
the MPC if inflation goes outside the target range. In fact the opposite is true…… In the face of a
supply-shock, such as a big jump in the oil price, which pushed inflation way off target, the MPC could
only get inflation back to 2.5 per cent quickly through a draconian interest rate response – at the
expense of stability, growth and jobs. Any sensible monetary policymaker would want a more
measured and stability-oriented strategy to get inflation back to target. And it is the Open Letter
system which both allows that more sensible approach to be explained by the MPC and allows the
Chancellor publicly to endorse it.”
Constrained discretion also provides much needed room for learning. Monetary policy remains more
art than science, and its practice is riven with uncertainties and risks. As the present Governor put it in
a lecture delivered in 1997 5 : ‘Inflation targets are a practical response to the fact that knowledge
increases over time.’
So a framework of constrained discretion combines much needed scope to implement policy flexibly,
in the light of both circumstances and experience, with the credibility benefits of committing policymakers to secure a pre-determined outcome for inflation. That, in essence, was the key difference
from the failed experiments of the past.

4

The development of the MPC

The MPC got off to a good start. It inherited an inflation rate that had been low for the past 5 years.
And the financial markets welcomed it by reducing the risk premia on UK assets.
No one had very clear expectations about how it would behave or how it might think. While it inherited
some technical features of the previous regime, the new Committee had quite a lot of scope to define
its own operating procedures and intellectual framework. If not a blank sheet of paper, it was a book
with many pages still to fill. As time has gone by, whole volumes have been filled. The Committee’s
procedures and thinking have matured. It has acquired patterns of behaviour and earned a name for
itself.
There have been a number of stages in the Committee’s development. Early on the MPC took steps to
set out the intellectual framework within which it would be operating, to promote public understanding
and enhance credibility. Over time, the Committee’s thinking has evolved, as members have rotated
on and off the group, and as the Bank has struggled to understand developments in the wider world.
And, as a result of taking more than 100 policy decisions, the MPC has acquired a track record, which
has allowed others to draw their own conclusions about its likely behaviour in different circumstances.
Practice in other central banks has developed too, as inflation targeting has spread, and all central
banks have become more transparent in their communications. This has raised the bar for a central
bank that wants to stay at the leading edge of monetary policy practice.
Finally, the MPC has acquired an enviably high reputation as a result of its overall performance and
the unprecedented stability of the economy over the past decade.
In short, the world has moved on, and the MPC has acquired a past and an identity.
Ten years is too soon for a mid-life crisis, but middle-aged members of the audience will readily
recognise the pressures that advancing years can bring. Sometimes we are tempted to bask in past
success, whether or not it is fully earned. In our better moments, we reflect on all that we have learnt,
through bad times as well as good. But there are days when we peer in the mirror and ask anxiously
whether we have lost our freshness and drive. Have we become too set in our ideas and in our ways?
Have others stolen a march on us? Have we become, to a degree, prisoners of our own past Maybe
even victims of our own perceived success?
The only way to deal with such fears is to confront them. That is a far larger task than I can do justice
to tonight, and it needs to be part of a continuing effort to improve our performance. But let me try and
give you an overview of some of the main issues in the remainder of my remarks.

5

“The Inflation Target five years on”, lecture delivered by Mervyn King at the London School of Economics, October 1997.

BIS Review 20/2007

3

Intellectual development
I want to start with the MPC’s intellectual development.
As the world around us changes, it throws up new policy challenges which force us to examine old
ideas and develop new ones. So the MPC has been on an intellectual voyage of discovery since it
was established.
The formation of the MPC unleashed a ferment of intellectual debate and activity inside the Bank. It
was a thrilling time for those who were closely involved. The Committee had to set out how it thought
about the world, first of all for itself, and then for the outside world. You can still see evidence of all this
activity on the Bank’s website – in speeches describing how the MPC saw the world, and in books
which set out the MPC’s models of the economy.
But the world does not stand still. Over the last decade, the Committee, and the Bank staff who
support it, have had to confront some enormous changes in the economic environment. The
Committee’s thinking has had to evolve to meet this challenge.
Without going into detail – that would require another speech – let me give you a flavour of some of
the questions with which we have been grappling during my own time on the Committee alone.
First, we have had to understand the implications of some very big movements in asset prices, both
domestically and globally. House prices have risen steadily, tripling since 1997, to reach record levels
relative to household incomes and rents. Share prices soared in the run up to the millennium, then
slumped, but have subsequently recovered. There has been a long running debate among central
bankers about how they should respond to asset price booms – and possible busts – with some
arguing that there is a case for taking pre-emptive action, over and above what might be warranted to
meet the inflation target over the normal two to three year horizon. There have been members of the
MPC on both sides of this argument.
Second, there has been an acceleration in the pace of globalisation. The entry into the global market
economy of China, India and Eastern Europe is effectively doubling the world economy’s supply of
workers – from 1.5bn to 3bn. This is having pervasive effects on wages, prices and, potentially,
economic relationships in developed countries in ways we need to understand in order to set interest
rates.
Third, the last few years have seen the largest recorded entry of foreign workers to the UK. This has
increased the supply capacity of the economy, as well as boosting demand, but the precise scale and
likely duration of these effects are very hard to judge. How is migration changing the ground rules by
which we set policy? If labour shortages were to cause more migration, rather than higher wages, we
would be in a rather different world from the one we are used to.
Finally, there has been a major surge in energy prices in the past three years – first a doubling in
global oil prices, and then an even larger rise in natural gas prices which was specific to the UK. Up
until now at least, the UK and the global economy appear to have weathered the impact of these
major cost shocks remarkably well. But precisely because the world has moved on so much since the
1970s, it has not been straightforward to predict or understand the impact of higher energy prices on
the inflationary process. (I will return to this subject later in my remarks).
The MPC tackles challenges like these all the time: you will see these questions discussed in the
minutes of our policy meetings, in our speeches, and in the quarterly Inflation Report. We also
commission research into these questions, which we publish in academic papers. This is not research
for its own sake; it is carried out to help Committee members, present and future, do a better job. We
need to keep refreshing our intellectual capital. Half a century ago, Governor Cobbold famously said
that the Bank of England is a bank, not a study group. Nowadays, the best central banks have
something of the study group about them.
Anniversaries are a good moment to take stock. So the TC enquiry and other events will prompt us to
review what we have learnt, and to identify where there are gaps in our knowledge.

Procedures and communications
The 1997 institutional reforms did more than take political considerations out of interest rate decisions.
They were intended to convince people that the inflation target regime was here to stay. The idea was
to align expectations of future inflation more closely to the target, by putting monetary policy in the

4

BIS Review 20/2007

hands of technocrats whose behaviour would epitomise professionalism. The pre-announced monthly
cycle of meetings, regular quarterly Inflation Report forecasts, and set briefing routines, were very
much part of the package. The goal of these new arrangements was to make the system
understandable and predictable to outsiders.
After a sharp burst of activity in the late 1990s, the processes and procedures surrounding monetary
policy have now settled down. We still use much the same internal processes and means of
communicating with the outside world as we did a decade ago.
But the outside world has not stood still, in at least two respects.
First, over time the MPC has established a track record of actions and communications which people
have, as intended, learnt to parse with great precision. There is a cottage industry in interpreting its
every utterance, in the light of its past behaviour, in order to predict its next actions. Any deviation from
past behaviour is assumed to be deliberate and considered.
A topical example is the market reaction to the latest interest rate rise. The formal position has always
been that the MPC may change rates at any one of its policy meetings. And in the early days of the
Committee that’s pretty close to what happened. But since 2001, as a matter of fact, rates have been
much more likely to change in the months when we publish a new quarterly Inflation Report. That was
why the January rate rise caused such surprise even though commentators were fully expecting a rate
rise to accompany the February Inflation Report. Indeed, such was the surprise that the market
immediately revised up its expectations for future interest rates. And there was a measurable increase
in uncertainty, as different interpretations of the Committee’s unusual action were debated across the
wires.
This episode highlights the difficult balance which the mature Committee needs to strike between
innovation and predictability. Today’s Committee members – only one of whom has been there since
the beginning – quite reasonably do not want to be unduly constrained by the habits of their
predecessors. But the passage of time has given ‘the Committee’ a collective personality. So changing
established patterns of behaviour requires at least as much care and explanation as in the early days
of the framework.
Second, even if we have not changed our procedures very much over the past decade, other central
banks have. They have become much more transparent. And the debate about how much central
banks should communicate – and how – has moved on, among academics, central bankers and
central bank watchers.
For example, a long-standing issue is how much central banks should say about their expectations of
future interest rates. The traditional concern has been that commentators would mistake a projection
for a commitment, the risk being that when interest rates did not change as projected this would be
damaging to credibility.
However, in recent years other central banks have moved increasingly towards giving indications
about the likely path of interest rates, given their forecast for the economy. Some inflation targeting
central banks – Norway, New Zealand and Sweden – are now publishing charts which show how they
expect to change policy rates to achieve their targets 6 .
Should the MPC follow this trend? If you follow press reports of our regular Inflation Report forecasts,
you might be forgiven for thinking we already have. But actually no: our forecasts take market
expectations for interest rates as their starting point, and we leave commentators to draw their own
inferences. We have maintained the position that we do not give hints about future interest rate
changes. Naturally we are looking closely at what happens elsewhere and we will want to learn from
their experience – though of course, since the MPC is not a consensual body, it would be a significant
complication to get it to agree an explicit path for interest rates.

6

In addition, the Bank of Canada now includes text in its monetary policy report which indicates whether or not rates will have
to change from their current level to meet the inflation target.

BIS Review 20/2007

5

Have we become prisoners of our past success?
Let me come, finally, to the biggest, and most difficult of the issues I want to raise tonight – namely the
extent to which the stability of the past decade has conditioned expectations of what the MPC can and
should do, in ways which may be both helpful and unhelpful to its ability to do its job.
The so-called Great Stability of the past decade has bestowed on the MPC the great gift of credibility –
a golden halo which eluded monetary policy-makers in the UK for most of the twentieth century.
What part has the MPC played in its own success? It’s difficult to say. But it is hard to believe that luck
played no role. My own view is that the MPC has benefited from a virtuous circle. As we have kept
inflation close to target, people have increasingly come to expect us to do so in the future, and to act
on the assumption that inflation will stay low. These expectations have underpinned the wages they
have bargained for, and the prices they have set. And that behaviour has helped us to keep inflation
under control in the face of destabilising events.
However, the unusual degree of stability, and the prestige it has conferred on central bankers, may
also have bred some less helpful attitudes: such as complacency about the ease with which the
economy can absorb shocks, and unrealistic expectations about what monetary policy can achieve.
Just to be clear: monetary policy can pin down average inflation over the medium term. It can not
deliver inflation at target at all times and in all circumstances, and certainly not in combination with
rock-steady growth in output.
Let me illustrate these points by looking more closely at one of the key challenges I mentioned earlier,
the impact of higher energy prices over the past two years.
Since 2004, global oil prices have more than doubled, a far sharper rise than at any time since the
1970s, when as some of you may recall, inflation took off, eventually peaking at 25%. Then, last
winter, UK wholesale gas prices surged, as a result of supply and storage problems that were, in large
part, specific to our market. The resulting increases in household gas and electricity bills have had a
large direct impact on inflation. By December, they alone were directly contributing 1pp to the
measured inflation rate.
These energy price shocks are now starting to unwind, at least for now. The oil price has fallen back,
although the outlook remains uncertain – the thin margin of spare capacity continues to make oil
prices unusually sensitive to all kinds of news, from politics to weather and supply. We can have more
confidence that the gas price shock is ebbing. The temporary supply and storage issues which caused
the price spike last winter have been addressed. Together with a milder winter, this has helped to
bring wholesale prices back to where they were two years ago, and retail prices have started to fall
back.
So, just as energy price increases have boosted inflation over the recent past, it now seems likely that
energy price falls are going to reduce it – possibly quite sharply – over the year ahead. Indeed we
expect inflation to fall below the target by the end of 2007.
Let me make two observations about this episode.
First, looking back over the past three years, the big picture is that inflation has stayed surprisingly
low, and output growth remarkably stable, given the scale of these cost increases. Inflation has never
deviated by more than 1 percentage point from the 2 per cent target.
But second, judging by the media and public reaction to the rise in inflation over the past few months,
it is clear that even a small deviation in inflation from target can now look very significant after the
stability of the past decade.
This illustrates both the helpful and unhelpful legacy of a decade of remarkable stability for the UK
economy.
On the helpful side, there is no doubt that a highly credible monetary policy framework has helped to
contain inflation, in the face of a very large cost shock. The UK has become a low inflation economy
since the 1970s and people expect the MPC to keep it that way. That affects the way they behave
when they take decisions about wages and prices.
The less helpful legacy is that even a small movement in inflation away from target – one percentage
point – has prompted some highly coloured media coverage, and may have unsettled people’s
expectations about where inflation is headed in the short run.
How does this less helpful legacy affect the policy debate?

6

BIS Review 20/2007

Remembering the earlier discussion of constrained discretion, a temporary spike in inflation, as a
result of a large cost shock like the recent rise in energy prices, is exactly the sort of shock to which
policy-makers should be able to react flexibly within an inflation targeting framework. That enables
them to avoid excessive volatility in output and employment, as long as public expectations of inflation
over the medium term remain pegged to the inflation target.
On the other hand, the MPC can never afford to ignore evidence that medium-term inflation
expectations are becoming dislodged: anchoring these expectations is fundamental to the success of
the framework. But direct evidence of inflation expectations is very hard to come by; the measures we
have are patchy and poor.
So there is a difficult dilemma here, which the MPC has been grappling with over the past few months.
And it has left me with a nagging worry. My concern is this. If the price of maintaining the public’s
confidence is that we have to try to keep inflation within a whisker of the target at all times – even in
the face very large shocks – the flexibility that is such an important feature of our present
arrangements may get significantly eroded 7 .
That is why the Open Letter procedure remains important – and why it is a great pity that it has been
widely misrepresented as a punishment, rather than as an opportunity for the MPC to explain itself.
Our monetary policy framework can only offer flexibility as long as it remains credible. But our
credibility needs to reflect reality. It is important that the unprecedented stability of the past decade
does not lead people to believe that central banks can walk on water. They can’t. When that becomes
clear – as at some stage it will – I see some risk that people will be excessively disillusioned.
So let me end by being very clear about what I regard as reality. The MPC cannot keep inflation
exactly on target, at all times and in all circumstances. Large price shocks will sometimes drive us
away from target, and we need to be able use our judgement in deciding how to react. But we can and
will keep inflation close to target on average. Short run deviations from the target should not leave
anyone in any doubt about that.

Conclusions
The stability of the period since 1992 has been almost as unexpected as the falling of the Berlin Wall,
and every bit as welcome. It remains something of a puzzle and we cannot assume it will continue
indefinitely.
We do not know quite how big a part the MPC has played in achieving this outcome. But it has
certainly been shaped by it. Success – however earned – has its price. It may have bred expectations
of the MPC and what monetary policy can deliver which are frankly unrealistic – and unsustainable in
the longer term.
In the original concept, the defining characteristic of inflation targeting and the MPC was the scope it
offered for exercising constrained discretion. We need to hang on to that big idea.

7

I would have a similar concern if people came to believe that the MPC could keep output growing steadily, quarter by
quarter, irrespective of wider economic circumstances.

BIS Review 20/2007

7

John Gieve: The City’s growth – the crest of a wave or swimming with the
stream?
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the London Society of
Chartered Accountants, Bank of England, London, 26 March 2007.
*

*

*

Introduction
Over the past few months there has been renewed talk of London overtaking New York as the world’s
leading financial centre. And it has reflected fears in the US as much as self congratulation in this
country.
We should take some of this with a pinch of salt. Talk of an external threat may be helpful to those
building a case for change in the US financial system. The US market remains the biggest in the world
by many measures. More fundamentally this is not a zero sum game. Even if London establishes a
comparative advantage and gains market share, New York (and Paris and Edinburgh for that matter)
can prosper too.
Yet something interesting is going on. The report by McKinseys commissioned by Mayor Bloomberg
concluded that “London is transforming itself into an increasingly sizeable and attractive talent hub for
people with … skills that used to be available only in New York …” and “… superior conditions for
innovation, capital formation, risk management and investment in these markets [derivatives and debt
financing] are beginning to emerge (or have already done so) in London, which is building momentum
relative to New York”. 1
On this side of the pond too, the growth of financial markets in the City is attracting more attention.
While much of that is favourable, we have seen renewed worries that London’s prominence and the
wealth it attracts and generates may be distorting the broader economy possibly adding to social
tensions – that it may be more a cuckoo in the nest than a golden goose.
So the future of the City is a significant issue not just for Londoners but for the development of the
wider British economy. And the development of the financial sector is of particular interest to the Bank
not just because it is an important part of the economy itself but because it shapes the way that our
monetary policy impacts on the wider economy and because of our responsibility with the FSA and
Treasury for maintaining the stability of the financial system.
I will be speaking about the impact of the City’s rapid growth on the broader economy in coming
months but today I want to focus on what underlies that growth and, therefore, to address the question
whether we should expect it to be a passing phase or to continue. Is London just on the crest of a
wave or is it swimming with a persistent stream?

Putting it into perspective
To start with, how important is the City? Is its press profile greater than its real contribution to the
economy?
The City’s output is hard to measure. 2 We know that financial intermediation as a whole accounted for
about 8.5% of UK Gross Value Added in 2005. And a recent estimate 3 of the professional services
supporting financial services accounted for a further 3.6% of economic activity in 2005, giving a total of
some 12%. That compares with around 14% of GDP for the UK manufacturing sector and the jobs in
financial and business services taken together have increasingly outnumbered those in manufacturing.

1

“Sustaining New York’s and the US’ Global Financial Services Leadership”. Report by McKinsey & Company to Mayor
Michael Bloomberg of New York and Senator Charles Schumer (pages 14 and 54).

2

Indeed the ONS has announced that it will be revising its estimates of the level and composition of GDP to incorporate
changes to the measurement and treatment of value added for banks and to take better account of in-house software
development.

3

International Financial Services, London. “International Financial Services in the UK”, November 2006.

BIS Review 29/2007

1

And since 1999 financial services and insurance taken together have accounted for over 20% of the
UK’s exports of services. So it is clear that the financial sector is an important industry for the UK.
But financial intermediation covers a great deal more than the City. Retail banking and insurance, like
other retail services from restaurants to hairdressing, is widely dispersed across the country. In
general one would expect this part of the industry to reflect the size of the population and their wealth.
To the extent that the UK’s industry may be relatively efficient and competitive, we may even have
fewer people engaged at this end of the business than some other countries. While in 2003 the share
of Gross Value Added from financial intermediation was a little higher for the UK than for France,
Japan or Germany (5%, 7% and 4% respectively) there was not that big a gap and the figures for the
US were about the same as the UK (8.5%).
It is London’s position in the wholesale and international markets that is special and it is harder to get
a handle on that. A recent estimate put the total number employed in “City” jobs at around 320,000. 4
There are other significant European centres in Paris and Frankfurt and, within the UK, in Edinburgh
for instance. But London is estimated to have 75% of UK's wholesale financial jobs and to be the
largest European centre for wholesale finance with 35% of the jobs (up from 30% in 2000). So by this
measure those working in “City” represent a little more than 1% of the UK workforce. While this is
estimated to be twice the equivalent proportion for Germany and three times that of France, we should
not get it out of perspective.

The economic geography of financial centres
Geographical concentrations, clusters, are common in many industries. In some cases they reflect the
availability of raw materials or power sources. Elsewhere the underlying reasons are not so obvious.
Watch making in Switzerland, films in Hollywood, the high-tech sector of Silicon Valley are all classic
examples. But the pattern of geographical hubs is particularly prominent in the financial industry. In
most countries, one city has tended to become predominant even if cities such as Chicago and
Edinburgh have developed important niches in particular financial services. Over time some of these
have become hubs for international finance like New York in the US, Zurich in Switzerland, Hong Kong
and Singapore in Asia and, of course, London in the UK.
The history of each centre has been shaped by a myriad of factors from empire, the role of guilds, and
the proximity of kings and governments. But a number of economic forces have also been at work and
are still reinforcing the pattern. 5
First, there are great advantages for both firms and workers from operating in a market with a deep
pool of labour with the right skills. Workers know that if their firms fail or shrink they can easily find
another job; firms can easily acquire new workers to start up or expand. Second, firms which have
expertise in supplying the main industry become established close to the cluster so new front-line firms
find the inputs they need on the spot. The 37,000 strong membership of the London Society of
Accountants is a good example of this. Third, where specialist firms and highly skilled workers are
grouped together the transfer of skills and information can be quicker. Knowledge and information
pass between workers in different firms, formally and informally, as they trade with each other, so
innovation is encouraged and productivity improves. Fourth, clustering tends to promote both
competition and cooperation. Clusters tend therefore to increase productivity, drive innovation and
stimulate the formation of new business. In these ways the clustering helps to create and reinforce the
comparative advantage which drives trade.
In the case of the financial industry some additional factors promote clustering. In the past of course
there was the physical need to be close to the market places but it appears that the centripetal forces
remain strong even in a world of electronic trading and video conferencing. There is a reputational
advantage of locating in an established financial centre, which signals you are part of the Premier
League. And in wholesale finance where the firms can be both sellers and buyers, business is

4

“City type” jobs in London include securities dealing, international banking, corporate finance, derivatives and foreign
exchange activity, fund management (including hedge funds), specialist insurance (such as Lloyds) and professional
services such as legal, accountancy and consultancy directly supporting other City jobs. They include jobs in Canary Wharf
and in the West End as well as those in the Square Mile.

5

See, for example, Fujita, M, Krugman, P and Venables A.J, “The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions and International Trade”
MIT 2001.

2

BIS Review 29/2007

attracted to liquid markets, in cash and securities. Each firm benefits from a pool of competitors taking
different positions.
There are also some centrifugal forces that tend to limit the size of clusters and ultimately drive firms
away. The more concentrated the activity, the more vulnerable trade can be to external shocks,
whether from earthquakes, wars or taxes. If there are restrictions on the supply of labour,
concentration can lead to shortages. And of course clustering can drive up prices of other factors of
production. In a successful urban centre, land in particular can become expensive.

The history of the City of London
But on balance the history of London’s financial sector illustrates how powerful the factors leading
towards concentration and clustering have been.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, it was not hard to see why international finance developed in
London alongside Britain’s pre-eminence as an economic and trading power. The need to provide
finance for trade stimulated the development of the money markets here, based around commercial
bills, and that in turn provided essential liquidity for longer-maturity securities markets. 6
By 1914, while Britain had been overtaken as the world’s leading economy, it remained the hub of the
international monetary system – the Gold Standard. UK had 42% of the world stock of overseas
investments and around one third of all the negotiable instruments in the world were traded on the
London Stock Exchange. And if London was important to the world, the world was also crucial to
London; more than half the value of securities quoted on the London Stock Exchange was accounted
for by loans for foreign companies and governments. 7
As an editor of the Economist during the period put it: “It [the City] is the greatest shop, the greatest
store, the freest market for commoditites, gold and securities, the greatest disposer of capital, the
greatest dispenser of credit, but above and beyond, as well as by reason of all these marks of financial
and commercial supremacy, it is the world’s clearing house.” 8
The benign international environment disappeared with the outbreak of the Great War, and the UK’s
political and economic standing in the world fell away steadily through the following 60 years. By 1950,
average incomes in the UK were below those in the United States, and they fell below Germany and
France by 1970. The economic dominance of the United States ensured New York’s place as the
leading financial centre and the American commercial banks became the world’s largest. In the 70s
and 80s the growth of Japan propelled Tokyo up the rankings. And in Britain, the share of foreign
securities issuance fell to only 6% in 1961, as against more than half before 1914.
So by the 1970s London was benefiting from few of the factors which had produced its golden period
before the first War. It had suffered from the destruction of the wars and the Depression, and from the
loss of Empire and protectionist policies at home and abroad, including capital and exchange controls.
In a faltering economy trade in government debt had supplanted much of its international business,
sterling had declined as an international currency, and the major British merchant banks and brokers
had been overtaken by the investment banks in the US and the universal banks in Europe and Japan.
Nonetheless, through all this London remained a leading international financial and banking centre.
On some measures, indeed, it retained its position as the leading centre for international finance for all
but a few years after the second war. 9 It had the critical mass to keep the skillbase and networks to
retain the professional trade in many markets. So, even in the 1960s the Euro markets developed
here.

6

Michie, RC “The City of London: Continuity and Change, 1850-1990” Macmillan, Basingstoke and London, 1992.

7

Cassis, Y. “Capitals of Capital. A History of International Financial Centres 1780-2005” Pictet and Cie, Geneva, 2005.

8

Kynaston, D. “The City of London”, Volume II Golden Years 1890-1914.

9

Reed, H. “The pre-eminence of international financial centres”, 1981.

BIS Review 29/2007

3

The recent growth of the City of London
Over the last twenty years, a number of reforms have improved the environment and helped the City
to build on its position. Exchange controls were removed in 1979, facilitating capital flows into and out
of the UK; and Big Bang, in 1986, opened up the Stock Exchange and paved the way for the
participation of the leading foreign investment banks in London’s market. At the same time the growth
of international trade and thus capital flows has brought in more business.
In some of the activities that London has long dominated, its growth in the last 10 years has largely
reflected the growth of global capital market activity.
In the foreign exchange market, for example, where the London market is and remains the largest in
the world, turnover was a bit over 30% of the global total in April 2004, broadly unchanged from 1998.
But turnover in London had increased by nearly 20% over the same period – a big increase despite
the creation of the euro, which removed the necessity for trading between so many currency pairs. On
an even larger scale the UK’s share of cross border bank leading – which has long been a strength of
London’s – remained unchanged at around 20% between 1998 and 2006. But over that same period,
the market grew by about 150%.
But there are several areas where London’s share of business is rising, particularly in new, innovative
and technically demanding areas of finance.
London’s share of world over-the-counter derivatives business, for example, has risen from around
35% in 2001 to nearly 40% in April 2004. And within that the notional amount of credit derivatives
traded in London multiplied by more than 100 between 1997 and 2006. While the US remains the
main centre of the hedge fund sector, at the latest count twelve of the world’s largest 50 hedge funds
were based in London, as against only three in 2002. London has a share of nearly 80% of the
European based hedge fund market, up from around 70% in 2002. The UK private equity market has
been another prominent area of growth recently. UK private equity funds raised in 2005 were over £25
billion, around twice the size of the previous peak in 2001, with the UK private equity industry
accounting for over 50% of the total European market.

The drivers of the City’s recent growth
In part the City’s recent growth reflects – as it did a century ago – a rapid growth in international trade
and financial liberalisation. Globalisation has brought an expansion of world imports by 180% since
1990 compared with an 80% increase in world GDP. Progressive upgradings of a number of emerging
economies have broadened and deepened international links. Higher savings in the emerging Asian
economies, in particular, have combined with demographic change in the West to increase demand for
long-term savings instruments and a fall in their yields. 10 All these trends taken together have led to a
period since 2002 of unusually high returns for holders of many financial assets and the explosive
growth in new products and markets.
But what is driving the growth of London in particular? One approach to this question is to ask
executives in major financial companies, both in the UK and abroad, why they choose to locate
business here. A number of these surveys have been conducted recently and they show several
common factors. 11
London benefits from English as an international language of commerce, and from its time zone, which
means the working day overlaps with Asia in the morning and America in the afternoon. London also
has well established financial infrastructure and telecommunication networks.
Many of those surveyed point to the regulatory and legal environment. This is partly a matter of the
regulatory style – the “risk based and proportionate” approach that the Financial Services Authority
has adopted based on general principles where possible. It is partly the simplicity of dealing with a
single regulator.

10

Caballero, R. “On the macroeconomics of asset shortages” NBER WP 12753, December 2006.

11

For example, Cook, G. A. S., Pandit, N. R., Beaverstock, J. V., Taylor, P. J. and Pain, K. (forthcoming in 2007). “The role of
location in knowledge creation and diffusion: Evidence of centripetal and centrifugal forces in the City of London financial
services agglomeration”. Environment and Planning A.

4

BIS Review 29/2007

English law, which is also the basis for financial services law in the United States, prevails here, with
the added advantage that practitioners are less likely actually to invoke the legal system. And what
has been called the Wimbledonisation of the UK financial markets – the sale of nearly all the British
merchant banks and stockbrokers and the dominance of foreign players – gives confidence to
prospective market participants that the competitive environment is genuinely open to all comers.
London is also a growing centre for Islamic banking. Finally, London may be benefiting from measures
elsewhere; certainly in the years since the Enron and WorldCom scandals, commentators have
suggested that the application of the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation to foreign firms listing in New York
may have encouraged some firms to list here instead.
But the single most important factor is the first one suggested by economists: London’s comparative
advantage lies in its skilled labour and financial know-how both in the financial firms and in the
professions which support them.
The free movement of labour within the European Union, and relative openness to immigration by
those with specific expertise from outside it, has also meant that employers in the financial sector can
access the world labour market. And the relative flexibility of the labour market here in the UK
compared to others in Europe may also be a factor.
That concentration of skilled labour has spurred competition and innovation. We have seen a very
striking illustration of this in the last few years with the rapid growth of hedge fund management and
private equity firms in London. Many have been established and are staffed by people who acquired
their skills and earned their capital at the more established investment banks and fund management
firms of the City. Being at the heart of world markets helped them spot the opportunities and assess
the competition. Once they struck out on their own, they could draw on a network of former colleagues
and contacts for staff, information and expertise.

Future prospects of the City of London
So what are the prospects of the City of London?
One of the clear lessons from history is that any position can be lost. It is always possible to throw
away an advantage by ill judged decisions. Any widespread operational disruption or fear about
security could also be very damaging, which is one reason why we and the other tripartite authorities
are spending so much time on improving crisis response and management.
But in the absence of disaster the structural factors I have discussed seem likely to favour further
concentration of financial business in the City.
First, the entry of China and India international market has been associated with a massive expansion
of international trade and finance in relation to overall world GDP. That seems likely to continue and
has been a major factor in the growth of London in the past.
Fifteen years ago people worried that developments in information technology would undermine
centres like the City of London. When anyone could log on to receive market information and trade in
real time, wouldn’t traders flee the hurley burley and relocate to other, quieter and cheaper financial
centres or even out of cities altogether? What seems to have happened is the opposite. The reducing
costs of collating information and trading at a distance have led to operations relocating to London and
the City becoming an even more important cluster for financial activity. The technology which could
have allowed the dispersion of business has instead allowed greater concentration. 12
So whereas in 1997 the largest share of market turnover of Frankfurt’s Eurex market came from
traders based in Germany (over 80%), the largest share in 2005 came from the UK (with over 45%).
As more assets can be traded remotely, this may further drive the growth of centres like London with
large pools of skilled financial workers.
The growth of European capital markets relative to traditional commercial banking should reinforce
that process. Historically, European and equity markets have been smaller relative to their economies
than in the US. With around some $30 trillion in assets, euro-zone financial markets are still
significantly smaller than the $50 trillion in the US. But Europe is closing the gap. In 2005 the

12

HM Treasury, “The location of financial activity and the euro”, 2003.

BIS Review 29/2007

5

eurozone’s financial stock grew by over 20%, compared with around 6% in the US. And the eurozone’s financial depth has increased at twice the pace of the US over the past 10 years. 13 If this gap
continues to narrow, I expect this to favour the growth of London as the main centre for Europe’s
capital markets. The development of capital markets in Asia is further behind still and I would expect to
see continued rapid growth in these markets in the next decade.
The rationalisation brought by the single financial market in Europe should push in the same direction.
The number of central counterparty (CCPs) clearing houses by ownership has halved in Europe since
1999. And there were over 650 mergers and acquisitions in the EU banking sector between 2001 and
2005, a quarter of which were cross-border within Europe. But the process has some way to go and as
the European financial sector becomes more consolidated, and financial institutions become larger
and more complex, they tend to become more intensive users of capital markets. The major UK banks’
trading book assets, for example, now account for over 30% of their balance sheet assets compared
with little over 15% back in 2000.
What of the countervailing – centrifugal pressures? The creation of Canary Wharf, the expansion of
office space in the Square Mile and the West End has helped to allow the rapid expansion of recent
years. But of course London is an expensive city with high land and labour costs. So we have seen
financial firms outsourcing functions like IT support, systems development and HR both within the UK
and Europe and to India. That too seems likely to continue so further growth of trading and
management in London may well not lead to proportionate growth in jobs. On current trends we might
expect a greater concentration of high value, high skill jobs in London.

Conclusion
So back to my question: wave or persistent stream? The answer is, as you will have spotted, both.
Readers of the Bank’s Financial Stability Report (next edition due next month) – or those that have
read the financial news – will know that the financial markets have been buoyant recently; in particular
the premia for risks in the credit market are very low and profit growth and bonuses have been
spectacular. Some of this may well be the crest of a wave. However, for the reasons I have set out this
afternoon, London is also benefiting from a longer lasting and a strong current. We may expect that
cycle to turn at some stage – and London will be affected because of its international position. But
there are good reasons to expect London to further enhance its position as a global financial centre in
the long term. And that will have implications for the rest of the economy and the risks it faces. It will
continue to affect the labour market, the housing market, and the distribution of wealth and income.
And it will further sharpen the dependence of the British economy on wider international movements in
financial markets. I plan to return to these implications in coming months.

13

6

McKinsey Global Institute, McKinsey & Company's economics research institute.

BIS Review 29/2007

Mervyn King: The MPC ten years on
Lecture by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Society of Business Economists,
London, 2 May 2007.
I am indebted to Alex Brazier, Iain de Weymarn, Richard Harrison, James Proudman, Chris Salmon, Tim Taylor and Ryland
Thomas who have worked closely with me on this lecture.

*

*

*

Not long before his untimely death, David Walton invited me to deliver this lecture. Anyone who knew
David will be desperately sad not only that he is no longer with us to ask important questions and
make us smile at his dry humour, but even more so that he is unable to take his place at the
deliberations of the Monetary Policy Committee to which he contributed so much in such a short space
of time. David had a wonderfully clear mind, an independence of thought, and was a warm and
generous colleague. He is, and will continue to be, deeply missed. David asked me to look back on the
experience of the first ten years of life with the MPC and to try to learn from that experience. So, in his
memory, that is my aim this evening.
Although the announcement in 1997 of independence for the Bank of England was a bolt from the
blue, it was a long time in the making. During the 1970s inflation in the United Kingdom averaged 13%
a year and peaked at 27%. Only towards the end of that decade, with first a Labour and then a
Conservative Government recognising that the control of inflation was the first step towards any
semblance of a coherent macroeconomic policy, did the transition from the Great Inflation to the Great
Stability begin. But the first steps were faltering. It took two painful recessions and sterling’s exit from
the Exchange Rate Mechanism in September 1992 to reach the goal of low inflation. Even then, the
long-term commitment of the United Kingdom to low inflation was not fully believed by financial
markets. Granting independence to the Bank of England was the dramatic constitutional change that
convinced financial markets of the United Kingdom’s conversion to stability as the basis of
macroeconomic policy.
Next Sunday is the tenth anniversary of the historic announcement on the morning of Tuesday 6 May
1997 that the Bank of England would be granted independence. Although that decision was both
unexpected and far-reaching, we had been preparing to implement the manifesto commitment to
introduce a monetary policy committee to help the Bank formulate its advice to the Chancellor in the
context of the previous regime, in which the Chancellor decided on the level of interest rates following
a meeting with the Governor.
On the very day that Gordon Brown and Ed Balls entered the Treasury carrying a draft letter to the
Governor setting out proposals for Bank of England independence, the Bank completed a paper for
the incoming team setting out proposals for how an advisory committee might operate. It
recommended a fixed timetable for meetings between Chancellor and Governor and for the
announcement of decisions on interest rates. Many of the recommendations were carried over to the
independent MPC that followed. The optimal time for meetings was thought to be the end of the first
week of the month, and with minor changes the timetable of a two-day meeting culminating with an
immediate announcement of the decision at noon on Thursday was adopted within a couple of weeks.
The key difference was that a purely advisory committee would not have published minutes of its own
deliberations – only the minutes of the meetings between the Chancellor and Governor would have
been made public – and voting was not an agreed feature of such a committee.
My predecessor – Eddie George – was informed of the new and enhanced role for the Bank early on
the morning prior to the announcement – a Bank Holiday Monday. Returning from the tennis court, I
received a call from Eddie asking me to meet him in the Bank as soon as possible. That was the last I
saw of the sun for quite a time. We sat in his office with a sense of excitement that now we really did
have a chance to show what the Bank of England and price stability could do for this country. Eddie
charged me with the task of preparing ideas on how the new committee – the Monetary Policy
Committee – would decide and set the level of interest rates, and to draft the speaking note for the
very last Chancellor-Governor meeting which was brought forward from Wednesday to 8am on the
Tuesday.
By the next morning when the public announcement was made, a paper was ready setting out the
questions that the Bank would have to answer on how the new Committee would operate. We had a
script but, at this stage, the cast was incomplete. Only four of the five internal and none of the external

BIS Review 43/2007

1

members were in place. With the support and hard work of some extraordinarily talented young Bank
economists, the new arrangements were designed and put in place in not much more than three
weeks. They included the arrangements for briefing the Committee, the pre-MPC meetings, the format
of the decision-making meetings of the MPC, practical matters such as the ordering of a sound system
so that, in a break with tradition, it was actually possible to hear what was said in the Bank’s older
meeting rooms, and rehearsals of the meetings and voting procedures with staff members playing the
roles of the MPC members. So short was the time available that some of the dress rehearsals came
after the first night of other parts of the policy process. Such was the adrenalin flow that at one
rehearsal a row broke out about how a decision would be reached if the Committee split three-ways in
equal numbers. Needless to say, such an eventuality has not occurred.1 But all was resolved and the
show opened on Wednesday 4 June. At that first meeting the MPC raised interest rates by 25 basis
points, as it did at its two subsequent meetings.
A decade is a long time for any show to run. How has it fared? On the face of it UK macroeconomic
performance has improved with the creation of the new monetary framework. The MPC arrived on the
scene midway through what I have described as the nice (non-inflationary consistently expansionary)
decade, and continued into the not-so-bad decade.2 Since the MPC was set up economic growth has
averaged 2.8% a year – a little above the post-war average rate – and there has not been a single
quarter of negative growth. The average deviation of inflation from target has been just minus 0.08
percentage points.
Let me stress that the Committee does not dwell on the past. But an important question for all of us is
whether our new found stability will persist. That is not a new question. On the tenth anniversary of the
MPC we should remember that this is also the fiftieth anniversary of Harold Macmillan’s famous claim
that we had “never had it so good”. But let me remind you too of the full text of his remarks. In a
speech on economic prospects in July 1957, the former Chancellor of the Exchequer, who had
recently become Prime Minister after the resignation of his predecessor following an unsuccessful
military excursion in the Middle East, said:
“Indeed, let us be frank about it: most of our people have never had it so good. Go around the country, go to the
industrial towns, go to the farms, and you will see a state of prosperity such as we have never had in my lifetime –
nor indeed ever in the history of this country. What is beginning to worry some of us is, is it too good to be true? –
or perhaps I should say, is it too good to last? … Our constant concern today is, can prices be steadied while at
the same time we maintain full employment in an expanding economy? Can we control inflation? This is the
3
problem of our time”.

Some of you may think that it is the problem of our time too. CPI inflation has now risen above 3%, the
highest rate since the MPC was set up. Although I believe we are better equipped to maintain stability
now than fifty years ago, largely because we have a monetary framework based on an inflation target
and clearly defined responsibilities for the Bank of England, we should perhaps look in more detail at
how the MPC has worked before coming to a final judgement on the likelihood of continued success.
First, I want to look at the changes in the behaviour of the UK economy in recent years. How far is the
improvement attributable to the MPC? Second, I want to review how the MPC has operated as a
decision-making body. Has the process lived up to its billing as the most effective way of reaching
technical judgements on the level of Bank Rate? Third, and most important of all, I want to consider
the challenges to the MPC for the next ten years. What can we learn from the experience of the first
decade that may help us to improve over the next?

1.

Changes in the UK economy

In examining the first ten years of the MPC a natural starting point is to ask what has been its impact
on the UK economy since 1997. The objective of the MPC is, of course, to meet its inflation target.
Chart 1 shows that since the mid-1990s, inflation in the UK has been lower than for a generation. And

1

How a decision would be reached in such unlikely circumstances is explained in King (2002a).

2

Not-so-bad is an acronym for the “not of the same order but also desirable” decade. See King (2004).

3

I am indebted to Professor Peter Hennessy who, in his admirable book Never Had It So Good: Britain in the 1950s, drew
attention to the context of Macmillan’s remarks which were made in a speech in Bedford on 20 July 1957.

2

BIS Review 43/2007

there have been significant changes in the dynamics of inflation since the MPC was set up.4 Table 1
shows the mean, standard deviation and persistence of inflation over various periods. Inflation has
been significantly lower on average, less variable, and fluctuations in inflation have tended to be less
persistent.
More generally, the impact of the MPC is revealed by what I have called the “Performance” and
“Stability” charts – charts 2 and 3. In terms of average rates of output growth per head and of inflation,
charts 2a and 2b show the relative position of the UK economy among the G7 as a whole both before
(taken here to be the period 1950 to 1996) and after (1997-2006) the creation of the MPC. Ideally, a
good performance means that a country would be towards the top right hand corner of the charts –
inflation is plotted on an inverted scale. The average record on growth and inflation over the period
1950-96 (chart 2a) was not good relative to the rest of the G7. Indeed it was arguably the worst. In
contrast, after the MPC was set up the United Kingdom performed better than most if not all of the G7
countries. So although changes in the world economy may have proved helpful to achieving lower
inflation, the fact that the UK improved not only its absolute but also its relative performance – moving
from last to first in the G7 league table – is encouraging.
The stability charts – 3a and 3b – show the stability of growth and inflation in the G7 countries in the
two time periods. In these charts a good performance is to be near the origin of the axes, close to the
bottom left hand corner of the chart. The rather poor performance of the United Kingdom prior to 1997
is evident, as is the remarkable degree of stability in the United Kingdom relative to the rest of the G7
after that date.
Of course, correlation does not imply causation. And there is little reason to suppose that the MPC is
responsible for the higher average growth rate over the past decade. That more likely reflects
structural changes in the UK economy, associated with other policy reforms. It is the stability of the UK
economy which appears to be the most marked contribution of the MPC. That is a surprise. The
conventional wisdom is that, although there is no long-run trade-off between the levels of inflation and
output growth, there is a trade-off between the stability of inflation and of output growth. Inflation can
be kept closer to the target only by larger changes in interest rates and bigger fluctuations in output
growth. Policy-makers thus face a choice between different combinations of inflation and output
growth volatility, which, when plotted on a chart, describe a “stability possibility frontier”.5 They can
choose a point on that frontier depending on the relative importance they place on stabilising inflation
and output growth, but they cannot move inside it. That is, they cannot reduce the volatility of both
inflation and output growth.
An example of that “stability possibility frontier” is shown in chart 4. Points B and C represent
alternative choices by central banks with different reaction functions, corresponding to the different
weights they attach to the costs of volatility in inflation and output. Central bank B tends to bring
inflation back to target more slowly than central bank C. So the real surprise is that, over the past
decade, we have moved not along the frontier, say from point B to point C, but instead to A. The
frontier itself has moved significantly inwards.6 The conventional wisdom has been overturned. Was
that the result of luck: an absence of shocks and favourable structural changes in the economy? Or
has the new monetary framework itself played a role?
How might the MPC have been lucky over its first decade? First, there might have been unusually few
significant economic shocks to which the Committee had to respond. Output and inflation would have
been more stable even without a change in the monetary framework. Second, when shocks did occur
the economy might itself have responded in a self-regulating manner.
On the first, it is difficult to argue that there have been no major economic shocks since 1997. At the
outset, the Committee had to confront the consequences of a 25% rise in the effective exchange rate
and the resulting fall in import prices. Between 1996 and 1998 import prices fell by 20% relative to
overall consumer prices – the biggest fall over any two year period since the early 1950s. That was

4

Some of these changes in the inflation dynamics date from 1992 when the inflation target was introduced, although the fall
in inflation expectations occurred in 1997.

5

This is known in the academic literature as the ‘Taylor Curve’. See Taylor (1979).

6

I have defined the frontier for a given set of monetary policy arrangements – technically, for a given distribution of the
inflation target. If the frontier is instead defined as corresponding to an optimal policy where the inflation target is believed
with certainty then the movement from B to A is a move onto the frontier from a point outside it.

BIS Review 43/2007

3

shortly followed by the Asian financial crisis and the Russian default and devaluation in 1998 which led
to concerns about the stability of US and other financial markets. Later there was the world IT-led
slowdown in late 2000 and 2001, and sharp falls in equity prices. The share of government final
consumption in nominal GDP rose by 4 percentage points between 1998 and 2005 – the biggest
continuous expansion since 1945 – and the share of taxes in total income rose. More recently, oil
prices more than doubled and the labour force expanded by 1 ½% in 2006, a rate exceeded only once
in the past 35 years. And the terrorist attacks on September 11 2001, and the wars in Afghanistan and
Iraq, added to uncertainty.
So the environment in which the MPC has had to operate has not been without excitement. But did the
economy respond to that excitement in a self-regulating way? It is clear from the performance chart
that the supply side of the UK economy has undergone substantial change – the average rate of
growth of output per head has increased from 2.1% between 1950 and 1996 to 2.4% in the past
decade. It could be argued that the structural reforms of recent decades have made the UK economy
and, in particular, the labour market, more flexible. Greater flexibility has enabled unemployment (and
its natural rate) to fall steadily.
Structural reforms also led to more stable growth of employment and output. If businesses are to
stabilise employment in the face of changes in costs, employees must accept fluctuations in the real
value of their take-home pay. When import prices fell sharply, employees benefited from rapid growth
in real take-home pay. More recently, however, businesses have faced higher energy costs and
employees have accepted somewhat weaker growth of real take-home pay.
The acceptance of necessary adjustment in real take-home pay has helped to stabilise employment
growth which, over the past decade, has been four times less variable than over the previous five
decades. That has shifted the “stability possibility frontier” faced by the MPC inwards, enabling the
MPC to keep inflation more stable than in the past.
Structural improvements in the labour market are, however, unlikely to explain the full improvement in
the stability of inflation and output. They cannot explain the low and stable level of inflation
expectations. Changes in the yields on government bonds indicate that investors’ expectations of
inflation over the medium-term – and the premium they require to compensate them for the risk of
future inflation – have also fallen significantly. Chart 5 shows the sharp fall in expected inflation that
resulted from the actual announcement of independence for the Bank of England in 1997.
It seems to me likely that the new framework for monetary policy has been a key, though not the only,
driver in moving the frontier inwards. By eliminating uncertainty about the inflation target and ensuring
that the objective of low and stable inflation is well understood and credible, the change in the
framework in 1997 helped to anchor expectations of inflation in the medium term. By doing so, it has
made it possible for the MPC to keep inflation closer to target with smaller changes in monetary policy,
and hence fluctuations in output, than would otherwise have been the case.
The anchoring of inflation expectations has changed the way businesses respond to unexpected
shocks. Faced with changes in their costs stemming from, for example, changes in import or energy
prices, businesses can respond in two ways, each consistent with the necessary change in
employees’ real take-home pay. They can pass those cost changes forwards to prices or backwards to
money wages. With inflation expectations well-anchored to the target, companies have restricted the
pass-through of changes in costs to prices. The necessary adjustment of real take-home pay has
taken place more through fluctuations in money wages than prices.
In short, the behaviour of the UK economy has improved over the past decade, both in terms of its
performance and its stability, and that improvement has been more marked in the United Kingdom
than in the rest of the G-7. Although structural reforms to the economy over several decades have
made the economy better able to respond to economic shocks, the new monetary framework has also
played a key role. Inflation expectations have been successfully anchored to the target. And that has
meant that cost changes have affected wages and profits rather than prices. As a result, inflation and
output growth have been remarkably stable.

2.

The change in monetary policy decision making

It appears then that the success of the framework in anchoring inflation expectations has played a key
role in the economic stability of the past decade. What was it about the framework that accounted for
that?

4

BIS Review 43/2007

Since its inception, the MPC has met 120 times.7 At those meetings it raised Bank Rate 17 times,
lowered it on 17 occasions, and left it unchanged 86 times.8 Bank Rate has varied between 3.5% and
7.5%. The MPC has changed interest rates at just over a quarter (28% in fact) of its monthly meetings.
Companies, households, trade unions and financial market participants can see that we change
interest rates in response to news about the inflation outlook. That anchors inflation expectations. In
the jargon of economists, people understand that we have a “reaction function” – we react to the
economic data in order to keep inflation on track to meet the target.
If the economics profession could agree on a model which described exactly how the economy
behaved, then it would be possible to set up a Royal Commission of the country’s leading economists
to determine the optimal “reaction function” for the Bank of England to follow. It would specify how
interest rates should respond to the unfolding of economic data. It could even be implemented by a
computer without any need for a Monetary Policy Committee at all. That sounds quite attractive
(especially when you’ve attended 120 meetings!).
So why don’t we set up a Royal Commission? As members of the SBE know only too well, none of us
knows the true structure of the economy or all the shocks that might occur. How long do you think it
would be before some other economists would argue, undoubtedly persuasively, that their own
research had made the findings of the Royal Commission redundant? Who would have thought in
1997 that monetary policy would have to respond to the challenges posed by the largest inflow of
migrant labour and the fastest fall in import prices since Harold Macmillan was Prime Minister?
Uncertainty is at the heart of practical monetary policy making. The best that we – as economists –
can do is continually to learn about the changing nature of the economy. It is impossible to write down
any stable “reaction function”. Even if we could identify the shocks hitting the economy, judgement as
to how we should react to each of them cannot be set in stone. The structure of the economy changes
through time as does our knowledge of the way it works. The MPC is there to exercise discretion
about how to react to shocks. Central to the design of a framework for monetary policy is our
ignorance and uncertainty about how monetary policy works. The MPC is an institutional response to
that ignorance.9
The best way to make technical judgements under uncertainty is by making use of the accumulated
wisdom of a committee whose members can pool their knowledge and expertise. This is the
motivation behind the MPC and explains its two key features.10
First, it is a committee of experts who, before making their decision, discuss their interpretation of the
economic data and learn from each other.11 Our Wednesday afternoon discussions take the form of a
debate, not a series of presentations. And on Thursday mornings when the time comes to go round
the table and make a decision, it is common, as, for example, happened at our most recent meeting in
April, for members to want to listen to the views of other members before making up their mind which
way to vote. That is why no-one is forced to cast their vote for a particular level of Bank Rate until they
have heard the views of the whole Committee. As a result, there is often some suspense as to the final
outcome. In January, for example, when the Committee raised Bank Rate by five votes to four, that
outcome looked unlikely when at one stage opinion was four to two for no change with only three
people to speak.
The greatest debate among the Committee usually occurs during the quarterly forecast round which
often stimulates fresh thinking. So it is perhaps not surprising that this is when many, but by no means
all, changes in interest rates are decided – see chart 6. Changes have been twice as frequent in
Inflation Report months as in other months. But it is changes in economic conditions which are more
important in determining the timing of our decisions.

7

Including one emergency meeting following the events of September 11 2001.

8

On 20 occasions the MPC has met with fewer than the full complement of nine members. 12 of those occasions were before
the Bank of England Act came in to effect and the ninth member could be appointed. Since June 1998 it has also been short
of its full complement on 8 occasions.

9

The role of uncertainty and learning in monetary policy was discussed in my 2005 Mais Lecture. See King (2005).

10

See, for example, Blinder (2004), Blinder and Morgan (2000) and Lombardelli et al (2005).

11

The arguments for delegating decisions on interest rates to a committee of experts were discussed in my May 2002 lecture
to the Society of Business Economists. See King (2002a).

BIS Review 43/2007

5

Second, members of the Committee are individually and publicly accountable for their votes.
Disagreement among the Committee is inevitable; it is also desirable because it represents the
individual judgements of members, rather than an attempt to create a false consensus. It is a source of
strength. Over the past ten years, there have been 153 dissenting votes, on average more than one
per meeting.
This institutional encouragement of open debate is in contrast to many other central banks. We don’t
“do consensus”, as one former member put it. Dissent is more frequent than on other central bank
committees which publish individual votes, and is not just token. Table 2 reports the proportion of
dissenting votes in four central banks during the period since the MPC was set up. Not only is the
number of dissenting votes greater on the MPC, the frequency of more substantive disagreement –
where one quarter or more of the voters dissented – is markedly greater.
Voting patterns on the MPC reflect the distribution of views about how to interpret the economic data,
not a hint about where rates will go. Voting is certainly not used as a signal by the Committee. That is
why you can discount claims that disagreements can be used reliably to predict future movements in
rates. Sometimes they do, sometimes they don’t.
Much of the commentary on the MPC has been subject to what I call the “small sample” problem.
Descriptions of diversity of view within the MPC have ranged from the Committee allegedly acting as
“the North Korean politburo” during periods when most of the votes were unanimous, to the view that it
was “a bunch of squabbling senior common room academics” during an earlier period when split votes
predominated. In fact, as chart 7 shows, there is no obvious pattern over the lifetime of the MPC.
There are times when the state of the economy is difficult to read and there are naturally differences of
interpretation leading to split votes. Equally, there are times when the nature of the economic shocks
is not in dispute and the response of the MPC is agreed by all members. For example, a sequence of
nine unanimous decisions starting in the summer of 2004 reflected a shared view within the MPC that
Bank Rate at 4% was too low and that some of the monetary stimulus it provided should be withdrawn.
Differences of view tell you more about the nature of the uncertainty confronting the MPC than the
nature of the MPC itself.
Similar arguments apply to the question of whether the MPC has become more or less “activist”. Large
committees can be subject to inertia. At its very first meeting the Committee debated the merits of
“gradualism” in adjusting interest rates. Although the debate attracted some interest, looking back over
ten years it is hard to see that it had any practical impact. As chart 8 shows, there is no obvious
persistent trend in the frequency of rate changes over the lifetime of the MPC. Economic conditions
have determined the number and direction of rate changes. There is some indication that the number
of changes was lower in the second than in the first five year period. But that reflected the size and
nature of the shocks over the respective periods, and also the building of credibility which meant that
market anticipations of future actions allowed the Committee to offset shocks by smaller changes in
interest rates. It is striking that the MPC is in the middle of the ranking of the major central banks by
the number of interest rate changes a year – see table 3.
My view, therefore, is that it is the economic data which lie behind the debate and decisions of the
MPC. Do you agree? To answer that question the Bank of England asked the Society of Business
Economists (SBE) to carry out a survey of its members. The aim was to discover what kind of
information was of most use to private sector economists in trying to understand the future path of
interest rates at different horizons, and how the communications of the MPC were perceived as part of
that process. The survey consisted of an electronic questionnaire sent to 354 members of the SBE.
141 replies were received, a response rate of 40%.12 Over 85% of respondents said that forming a
view of interest rate prospects was important to them.
For those of us who have continually argued that the news on interest rates stems from developments
in the economy rather than meetings of the MPC, it is heartening that, collectively, you place more
weight on economic data than on MPC communications in forming a view of interest rate prospects.
Respondents were asked to allocate a total of 100 points across the categories of information in terms
of how useful they were in forming such a view. Twice as many points were given to economic data as
to MPC communications, especially at the longer horizons – see chart 9. And the weight on data was
divided roughly equally between financial data, official data on real activity, official figures for costs and

12

6

The full survey is to be published in the next issue of the SBE’s journal, the Business Economist.

BIS Review 43/2007

prices, and business and consumer surveys. So the argument that the MPC responds to
developments in the economy has been largely understood. This is welcome news for those of us who
wish to be boring.
So far I have talked only about the past – the performance of the UK economy and the behaviour of
the MPC since 1997. What of the future?

3.

Challenges for the next decade

I want to devote the remainder of this lecture to the challenges facing the Monetary Policy Committee
over the next ten years. That is not because I see major fault lines in the present arrangements. On
the contrary, the careful institutional design that lay behind the construction of the MPC has proved its
worth. Nor is it because I share some commentators’ boredom with a system that has remained
largely unchanged for a decade. After all, in the area of macroeconomic policy, boredom is a good
thing. Rather, it is a conviction that to remain successful the MPC must always be engaged in a
process of continuous improvement.
The anchoring of inflation expectations has been central to the stability enjoyed by the UK economy
over the past decade. The key lesson from economic theory is not to take those expectations for
granted – they depend on the actions of the MPC. Inflation expectations have been anchored because
the MPC has responded to events that have pushed the outlook for inflation away from target, and
households, businesses and financial markets have understood and anticipated our responses.
So the main challenge facing the MPC is to keep doing whatever is necessary to keep inflation on
track to meet the target. In modern models of inflation, monetary policy is represented by a “reaction
function” that is sufficient, in that model, to pin down inflation and, therefore, inflation expectations.
But that just assumes away the challenge facing us. How do we know, in an uncertain and everchanging world, what precise path of interest rates is necessary to stabilise inflation in the medium
term? That raises questions about both what we do and what we say.
(a)

What we do: The role of money and the nominal anchor

Let me start with what we do and how we provide an anchor to the price level in the long run. With a
paper currency, expectations that the future price level will remain stable are an article of faith. Such
expectations are the basis of the trust without which people will not willingly use paper money. They
reflect beliefs about how the central bank will react to events. Given our current arrangements, the
anchor for expectations of the future price level is the judgement and character of the men and women
who currently, and will in the future, serve on the Monetary Policy Committee. That is a crucial
difference between money as a standard of value, where its value is determined by the judgement of a
group of experts, and the standards of weights and measures, such as the metre, kilo or second,
which are based on objective scientific measurement. I hope that one day the Governor of the Bank of
England will be regarded as occupying a position similar to that of the Chief Executive of the National
Weights and Measures Laboratory.13 For the time being the value of money will depend upon the
discretionary judgements of the MPC.
For those judgements to command respect, it is vital that the Committee demonstrate their
determination to react to all signals about the outlook for inflation. It is common – both in the press and
within central banks around the world – for discussion of the inflation outlook to be dominated by an
analysis of so-called real changes in the economy such as movements in demand or supply and
changes in the relative prices of imports or energy. It is true that, in trying to stabilise inflation in the
short-term, the MPC will take those events into account. But we know that, beyond the short-term
forecasting horizon of up to around three years, inflation has nothing to do with these developments. It
is, in the old adage, the result of too much money chasing too few goods.
That is why money growth rates and inflation rates are well correlated across countries and over long
time horizons. Many of the great economists of the past from David Hume to Milton Friedman
emphasised the link between money and the price level in the long run.

13

At present the Chief Executive is Jeff Llewellyn.

BIS Review 43/2007

7

Why, then, does money not play a more prominent role in discussions of the outlook for inflation and
monetary policy? Monetary developments can reflect two different causes: changes in the demand for
money and changes in the supply of money. They have very different implications for inflation.
Movements in the demand for broad money, relative to spending in the economy, reflecting changes in
the way different assets and liabilities are used in transactions or shifts in portfolio preferences, have
no implications for spending in the economy or the path of inflation. They make the relationship
between money growth and inflation unpredictable. That contributed to the poor outcomes when
explicit money supply targets were used to guide monetary policy in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Changes in the supply of broad money, however, will lead to an imbalance in the relationship between
money and prices. Either spending and the price level will adjust or the central bank will have to alter
its policy rate to eliminate the change in the supply of money.
The practical problem facing all central banks is how to distinguish between shocks to the demand for
money and shocks to its supply. After a period of rapid financial innovation during which shocks are
predominantly to the demand for money, it is understandable, though unfortunate, if monetary
developments are given insufficient attention in the analysis of the inflation outlook.
How should a policymaker respond to developments in money and credit? One approach is to ignore
them on the grounds that they contain no incremental information about the outlook for inflation. This
approach – which is compatible with many modern models of inflation – may well appear appropriate
when money growth is associated with shocks to the demand for money that have few, if any,
implications for spending and inflation. Ignoring developments in money and credit would, however, be
a mistake when there are shocks to the supply of money.
What can generate such shocks to the supply of money? Modern models of monetary policy tend to
be silent on this point. Economic theorists continue to struggle to develop microeconomic
underpinnings of the roles of money, both as a medium of exchange and a store of value. This
explains why money is often hidden. By construction, models often ignore the role played by banks
that extend credit to borrowers and, in the process, create liabilities that serve as money. In those
models nominal interest rates are set according to a “reaction function” that always returns inflation to
the target. The implicit assumption is that the supply of money passively and instantly adjusts to that
warranted by the demand for money.
In reality, of course, our ignorance about the economy is such that we can never be sure that the level
of Bank Rate at any point in time is consistent with bringing inflation back to the target over the
medium term. And developments in the banking sector can lead to an expansion of the supply of
broad money and credit even while Bank Rate remains constant. It is quite possible, in the real world,
for there to be unwarranted money supply shocks – whether stimulus or restraint. The MPC must
always be looking for warning signals of this.
The trap is falsely to conclude that, because some economic models contain no explicit reference to it,
money cannot be one of those signals. The conventional riposte is that, if monetary policy were set
incorrectly, warning signals would also be observed contemporaneously in other indicators such as
measures of inflation expectations, demand or interest rates. I would not want to rely on that for three
reasons, which together imply that the growth of money and credit may signal in advance of other
indicators that Bank Rate is set at a level inconsistent with bringing inflation back to the target in the
medium term.
First, we do not have good indicators of the expectations of businesses and employees and, in looking
at measures of expectations in financial markets, we must be alert to the possibility that those
expectations are formed by people falling into the same trap.
Second, the spending of many households and businesses is constrained by the need to use money
in transactions and by the availability of credit.14 For these households and businesses, changes in the
availability of money and credit lead changes in their spending intentions.
Thirdly, official interest rates are not a sufficient statistic for the array of effective interest rates
confronting borrowers and lenders – risk premia which reflect the creditworthiness of the borrower

14

8

Goodhart (2007).

BIS Review 43/2007

alter effective interest rates. Since many of those rates are unobservable by the MPC, money, credit
and asset prices may contain valuable information about the likely outlook for spending.15
As chart 10 shows, there are times when monetary developments have represented shocks that have
affected the supply of money and proved a warning sign of inflationary risks. At other times, its
movements have been dominated by changes in the demand for money.
In 1973, for example, broad money growth had picked up sharply but inflation was subdued. Yields on
gilts provided no indication that a rise in inflation was expected by financial markets. But the rise in
money growth, which looked at first to be another instance of a change in the demand for money, was
in fact an increase in supply and led to faster expansion of spending in the economy and, by 1975,
higher inflation.
The 1980s illustrate shocks to both money demand and supply. The first part of the decade was a
period of large structural change in financial markets. The demand for money rose sharply relative to
spending in the economy so, for a time, broad money growth was rapid and inflation was falling. That
structural change probably continued into the second half of the decade. But it now seems that there
was also some unwarranted expansion of the supply of money. For a time, that shock was disguised
as further structural change in the demand for money but, in 1988, inflation began to rise.
It is easy to be wise after the event. And it is never easy to distinguish between demand and supply
shocks to money. But that is true for shocks to many economic variables and is no reason to assume
that money supply shocks are simply absent. When we look at output data, we routinely ask ourselves
the question: is it a demand shock or is it a supply shock? We do not rely on the simple correlation in
the past between output and inflation. It was important for the Federal Reserve to identify output
movements in the late 1990s as the result of a supply (productivity) shock rather than an increase in
demand. The challenge is to carry this level of interrogation and questioning of the data to our analysis
of money and credit. We are trying to develop models that help us to distinguish between demand and
supply shocks to money and we shall be devoting more resources to this task, including our new
Credit Conditions Survey.
(b)

What we say: central bank communications

In recent years, a great deal has been written about how and why central banks communicate with
financial markets and the public more generally. Communications are crucial to a central bank’s ability
to anchor inflation expectations. Only two questions really matter. What are central banks trying to
communicate and to whom?
The first task for a central bank is to communicate the case for price stability in a simple and
straightforward way to as wide an audience as possible. With our range of publications, films, the
competition for schools Target 2.0, and our programme of regular regional visits, the Bank of England
invests a good deal of resources in achieving this objective. We also monitor progress using opinion
polls and report regularly their findings. Building a large constituency for price stability is an essential
part of convincing people that low and stable inflation will be at the heart of macroeconomic policy for
the indefinite future. For the MPC, there is the specific task of explaining that by price stability we
mean our target of 2% inflation as measured by the CPI.
The second task relates to communication about the reasons for monetary policy decisions to financial
markets, households and businesses. No communications strategy can ignore the fact that the
Monetary Policy Committee was set up precisely because there is no timeless “reaction function” to be
communicated to the public. It is as important to explain what we don’t know as what we do know. We
are trying to get across the fruits of our learning about the economy, not a static view of the world. Our
aim is to help people understand the thinking behind the Committee’s decisions, the various
hypotheses that the Committee entertains about the current conjuncture and the data that we shall be
examining in order to discriminate among them. That should help people work out how we are likely to
react to future data as they come in. And it is why we place importance on the minutes of our monthly
meetings and the quarterly Inflation Report to convey a full explanation of our thinking.
Explaining our analysis at some length is a richer source of information for markets than code words or
statements about the future path of interest rates. Less weight should be placed on the short

15

See my discussion of money and risk premia in King (2002b).

BIS Review 43/2007

9

statements that are published with the announcements of our decisions because such statements, as
we have seen elsewhere, run the risk of becoming monetary policy by code word. They do not help
markets understand how we are likely to react to future data.
A number of academics have suggested that the MPC publish forecasts for the path of Bank Rate.
Several central banks now do so, noticeably the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Norges Bank and
the Riksbank. Although there is some superficial attraction in such a move, there are four points that
suggest the need for caution.
First, what markets need more than anything is not an unconditional forecast of where interest rates
might go, but an idea of our contingent response to data as they evolve. That is not easily
communicated by a path – even when shown as a fan chart – for future interest rates. It requires a
careful reading of the Inflation Report, the minutes of our monthly meetings and speeches by
members of the MPC.
Second, there is little evidence that financial markets have in fact been particularly uncertain about the
yield curve in the UK. Indeed, a survey of Goldman Sachs traders by their own economists showed
that they thought, at longer horizons, interest rates were more predictable in the UK than in the euro
area or United States.16 We are less predictable one month ahead for the very good reason, which I
have explained before, that we are unable to pre-announce or signal the results of meetings the
outcome of which may sometimes be unclear to MPC members themselves until well into the second
day.
Third, a key principle of our present arrangements is that decisions on Bank Rate are taken by
majority vote of the members of the MPC. That is possible because they are voting on a single number
– today’s Bank Rate. But there is no equivalent voting procedure which can map from individual views
on an entire future path of interest rates to an overall path in a sensible manner.17 It might, or might
not, be possible to find a consensus. But how would that square with making decisions on today’s rate
by majority voting? The problem illustrates the important principle that communication cannot be
divorced from the way decisions are made.
Fourth, the Bank of England has tried extremely hard to ensure that forecasts are seen as probabilistic
statements. The Bank of England has been publishing fan charts for inflation and output growth for
more than a decade. Yet there are many commentators who still refer only to the central path. It would
be extremely dangerous to start publishing fan charts for future interest rates unless we were confident
that all commentators would understand the probabilistic nature of such statements. When the
Riksbank first published a fan chart for its future policy rate in February this year, an article written by
one of the most sophisticated investment banks totally ignored the probabilistic nature of the exercise.
Against that background, would we be able to convince the media’s huge audiences for personal
finance advice that they should not base their decisions on our central projections for interest rates
because they will almost certainly not come to pass?
Overall, then, I do not think that a compelling case has yet been made for the MPC to publish a
forecast of the path for Bank Rate. But we must certainly provide the information necessary for
financial market participants to form their own view as to the likely path of interest rates, and we must
always be trying to improve the quality of that information. We shall also keep in close touch with our
colleagues in central banks that do publish forecasts of policy rates to see what we can learn from
their experience. If we feel that there are net benefits from following their example, then we will do so.

16

See Goldman Sachs (2006).

17

There are many ways of aggregating individual votes on paths of interest rates, but none is particularly attractive. Svensson
(2003) has proposed that each MPC member declares a preferred path for Bank Rate. The collective path is formed by
taking the median value of Bank Rate at each date in the future. In general this collective path is not the path preferred by
any single MPC member and does not reflect an internally consistent set of views, posing a considerable communications
challenge. The least bad idea my staff in the Bank have been able to come up with is one that aims to balance the
preferences of all committee members – that is to maximise the Committee’s overall satisfaction with the outcome. To
operationalise this, there could be two rounds of voting. In the first, each Committee member would propose a preferred
path for interest rates. In the second round, Committee members would vote on the paths proposed by the other members.
This vote could be structured in a number of ways, for example: a simple ranking (with transferable votes to break ties);
allocating a fixed number of points over the alternative paths (again with transferable votes to resolve ties); or an
arrangement like the current one where, after discussion, the Governor proposes a motion which is likely to command a
majority. How all this would be communicated to the public I leave as an exercise for the interested reader.

10

BIS Review 43/2007

How successful are the MPC’s communications to financial markets and business more generally, and
should the Committee be considering other changes? The survey of SBE members I have already
described is interesting in this respect.
The first, and most striking, result is that, although the survey was conducted in the weeks immediately
following our “surprise” increase in Bank Rate in January, the response overall is very positive. Almost
90% of respondents found communications by the MPC to be either helpful or very helpful. But the
interest in the survey lies in the more detailed responses.
There are some important differences in the types of MPC communications that are thought to be
useful in forming a view of interest rate prospects at different time horizons. They are summarised in
chart 11. At shorter horizons, such as three months, the voting pattern on the MPC, together with the
minutes of meetings and the statement published when interest rates change, are thought to be more
informative than when forming a view of interest rate prospects over a time horizon of 12 to 18
months. At those longer horizons, it is the judgements contained in the Inflation Report that are
thought to be more useful. It seems to be that differences of view among committee members are
more relevant to assessing near-term interest rate prospects than the MPC’s collective assessment
which carries more weight at longer time horizons.
MPC communications were thought to be helpful in understanding how the MPC interpreted the latest
data and also in forming a view as to the prospects for interest rates. Over 60% of respondents
thought that the balance of MPC communication was “about right”, although around 20% felt that too
much commentary was devoted to the central view of prospects rather than to the balance of risks.
Given the emphasis which the MPC places on the fan chart as a means of conveying information
about forecasts, it is striking that there is a demand for even more information about the risks
surrounding the central projection rather than the central projection itself. There is, perhaps, a lesson
here in the need to redress the balance of discussion in the Inflation Report towards the risks and
away from the central projection. The view of respondents – largely City economists – in this respect
seems to me entirely rational, but in marked contrast to the pressure on us from the press.
Some of the words of respondents to the survey convey the flavour of their views. Several commented
on the benefits of more information about the range of views on the Committee. For example, “MPC
members could do more speeches, interviews and meetings to explain their individual views on the
macroeconomic outlook”. And “the key difficulty in framing the communications is that they are clearly
meant to convey the views of a group of people rather than one individual. At times when there is a
broad consensus this may not be a problem but if there is a difference of views the reports do not
always clearly convey the extent of this difference and how many people are in the various camps”.
Such comments reflect the inherent difficulty of communications by a committee with individual voting.
It is important that everyone understands the distinction between those forms of communication which
focus on individual views, such as the minutes, and those which present a collective viewpoint
explaining decisions of the Committee as a whole, such as the Inflation Report.
As I said in my lecture to this Society five years ago, “it should be clear that there are both benefits
and costs to a group decision-making process. The transparency and accountability of individual views
helps to make better decisions. But it also complicates the communication of the decision to a wider
audience, whose expectations of inflation matter for economic behaviour. The avoidance of confusion
requires some forbearance by individual members of the Committee, and a clear understanding of
which forms of communication are appropriate to explain individual views and which forms are suitable
for explaining the reasons for a collective decision”. Or, as Alan Blinder has put it in a discussion of
individualistic policy-making committees, “a central bank that speaks with a cacophony of voices may
in effect have no voice at all”.
The results of the survey are broadly consistent with the propositions I put forward in my Mansion
House speech last year. The inflation target and the MPC’s response to data are well understood.
Economists in the City know that economic data are the most useful source of information when
forming judgements about future interest rates. And the most useful form of communication for
economists when thinking about interest rates more than one year ahead is the Inflation Report. There
is little indication that respondents are looking for publication of an interest rate path – either in the
form of a central projection or a fan chart.
But there is room for improvement in the way we communicate. There seems to be an appetite for
more information about the way policy actions are linked to economic data and for more forwardlooking analysis of risks to the outlook. In other words, we should talk more about what lies behind the
fan chart and how we might change our thinking in response to developments in the data. We could,

BIS Review 43/2007

11

for example, provide more guidance on the sort of data that might influence the Committee’s thinking
on whether second-round effects from higher oil prices and national insurance contributions were
materialising.
In thinking about its future communications strategy, the Committee is conscious that there are more
or less sophisticated audiences to whom it is speaking. Inevitably, that will colour its judgements on
how to communicate its thinking. But the results of the survey provide food for thought. And I am very
grateful to all those who took the time and trouble to respond.

4.

Conclusions

There has been a sea change in the way monetary policy is conducted in the UK. That is evident in
the changing dynamics of inflation and in the stability of the economy more generally. It is not, I
believe, credible to dismiss that solely as the result of luck. Our monetary policy regime is firmly based
on an explicit target for inflation, a floating exchange rate, and clear institutional arrangements for
decisions on interest rates which are decided by majority vote of the Monetary Policy Committee with
individual accountability of its members. The MPC operates on a regular and pre-announced decisionmaking cycle which respects the principle of individual and accountable voting – there is no hiding
place on the MPC. All this amounts to a revolution in the way decisions on interest rates are made in
this country. As I said to this audience five years ago, “the MPC has proved to be one of those rare
“instantly invented precedents” that seem to have worked”. It is hard now to imagine policy being set
any other way.
The crucial achievement of the MPC is to have anchored inflation expectations. But, as the saying
goes, we are only as good as our last meeting. We fully recognise that we must keep our eye on the
ball if we are to continue to anchor inflation expectations on the 2% target. I have talked tonight about
some of the challenges facing the MPC over the next ten years. But there is no more important
challenge than keeping inflation and inflation expectations anchored on the target. I have enjoyed the
opportunity to look back over the past ten years, but, as the saying continues, the only meeting that
matters is the next one.
When Eddie George and I sat in the Governor’s office on that sunny Bank Holiday morning in 1997,
we knew we had been given an opportunity to change monetary policy for the better. We had to grab it
with both hands. That is exactly what the Bank has done.

References
Blinder, A S (2004), The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press.
Blinder, A S and Morgan, R (2000), “Are two heads better than one? An experimental analysis of
group vs individual decision making”, NBER working paper no 7909, September.
Goldman Sachs Economic Research (2006), “Should the MPC Have Pre-Announced the Hike?”, UK
Economics Analyst, 6, 9.
Goodhart, C A E (2007), “Whatever Became of the Monetary Aggregates?”, Peston Lecture at Queen
Mary College, London.
Hennessy, P (2007), Having It So Good: Britain in the Fifties, Penguin.
King, M A (2002a), “The Monetary Policy Committee Five Years On”, Speech to the Society of
Business Economists, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2002.
King, M A (2002b), “No Money, No Inflation: The Role of Money in the Economy”, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2002.
King,
M
A
(2004),
“Speech
at
the
Eden
Project,
Cornwall”,
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2004/speech229.pdf.

available

at:

King, M A (2005), “Monetary Policy: Practice Ahead of Theory”, Mais Lecture at the Cass Business
School, London, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2005.
Lombardelli, C, Proudman, A J and Talbot, J (2005), “Committees Versus Individuals: An Experimental
Analysis of Monetary Policy Decision Making”, International Journal of Central Banking, 1, 5.

12

BIS Review 43/2007

Svensson, L E O (2003), “The Inflation Forecast and the Loss Function”, in Mizen (ed.), Central
Banking, Monetary Theory and Practice: Essays in honour of Charles Goodhart, London: Edward
Elgar.
Taylor, J B (1979), “Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational Expectations”,
Econometrica, 47, 5.

BIS Review 43/2007

13

14

BIS Review 43/2007

BIS Review 43/2007

15

16

BIS Review 43/2007

Paul Tucker: A perspective on recent monetary and financial system
developments
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the
Bank of England, at Merrill Lynch Conference “A perspective on recent monetary and financial system
developments”, London, 26 April 2007.
*

*

*

Global monetary and financial stability
The past year or so has been marked by resilience in both the global economy and the international
financial system. World growth has been robust. On average, headline inflation across the
industrialised world has remained contained. Capital markets have, so far, weathered the gradual
withdrawal of monetary accommodation in much of the G7, and also a series of specific disturbances,
without destabilising spillovers. In short, the world has enjoyed a further period of monetary and
financial stability. Against that background, banks and dealers have posted fairly remarkable profits,
accumulating more capital resources; and the (risk-unadjusted) returns of the fund sector – and so
probably for most of you here today – have been healthy.
There are, for sure, wrinkles in this picture, including here in the UK. But overall it is probably not what
most commentators would have expected given that oil prices have more than doubled over recent
years. For financial markets, it has surely been important that such a large cost shock has not led to a
pronounced rise in global inflation, dislodging medium-term inflation expectations, and so prompting
industrialised country monetary authorities to slam on the brakes. With the build up of household debt
in many countries, and releveraging of parts of the corporate sector, that would not have been a happy
prospect.
That, taking the industrialised world as a whole, monetary credibility has been sustained without
aggressive policy action may owe something to the reasons for the increases in energy and other
commodity prices – namely, the rise of China, India and other Asian economies which, as well as
boosting global demand, has also been putting downward pressure on internationally traded goods
prices. But, as the Bank has argued before, the way these relative price changes play out in terms of
headline consumer price inflation depends on the overall path of aggregate nominal demand. And that
in turn owes something to the behaviour of central banks.
The textbook response to a cost shock is supposedly to allow the price level to rise, with the
associated temporary pick up in inflation being just that – temporary. In the jargon of central banking,
the “first round effects should be accommodated” in order to contain output volatility; but any
second-round effects on inflation, through wage bargaining and medium-term inflation expectations,
should of course be prevented.
What of practice? Well, notwithstanding the rise in inflation in the UK over the past eighteen months, it
is moot whether any of the major central banks did in fact fully accommodate the first-round effects of
the oil price rise. That the full impact of the rise in costs has not passed through to inflation owes
something, I believe, to wariness amongst central bankers of their being able, given uncertainty about
the underlying shocks, to calibrate policy with sufficient precision to bring about such a neat but vitally
important distinction between first-round and second-round effects; let alone of their being able to
communicate such a strategy to the public, the business community and financial markets. Textbook
orthodoxy might perhaps have been more compelling if the rise in energy prices had been both sharp
and caused purely by interruptions to, or constraints on, the supply of energy. But when, as over the
past couple of years, the rise in costs was partly the consequence of increased global demand, and
the price rise drawn out, the wariness in fully accommodating the first round effects was, I think,
tangible, and reasonable.

UK monetary policy
That has been the backdrop to my own approach to monetary policy over the past year or so. The
policy stance has needed to be set and explained in the context of cost shocks and demand

BIS Review 44/2007

1

conditions, placing a premium on clarity of communication about monetary strategy. 1 I have judged
that to be a delicate exercise given recent and prospective volatility in headline inflation. This thinking
informed my vote against an increase in Bank Rate in January. CPI inflation had risen quite sharply,
but was – and, I should say, still is – also expected to fall back quite sharply towards the 2% target.
Provided that broadly “humped” path for inflation materialised over the coming months, the upside risk
to medium-term inflation expectations seemed likely to subside. It was not a matter of my wanting to
avoid surprising the markets in some narrow sense, which in the greater scheme of things is neither
here nor there. Rather, I was concerned that an immediate move might, on balance, cause
unnecessary confusion about the Committee’s view of the medium-term outlook for inflation and about
monetary strategy. In the event, subsequent speeches by colleagues, and the medium-term
perspective of the February Inflation Report, helped to keep that genie in the bottle.
In February, I was strongly in favour of widening the width of the Inflation Report “fan chart” for inflation
during the coming year, to underline the near-term uncertainty about, and the great difficulty in
forecasting, the path of utility prices. It was vital to convey the medium-term prospect, and also that we
stand ready to act if the risks warranted it.
More recently, with Bank Rate at 5.25% and a modestly upward sloping money market curve, I have
characterised monetary conditions as “edging towards restrictive”, so long as inflation does as
expected fall back in the near term. That has been appropriate given the degree of pricing power
apparently emergent in conditions of relatively high capacity utilisation amongst firms. It has provided
the platform needed going forward to restrain inflation pressures, and to maintain anchored inflation
expectations, at a time when, understandably, there is public debate about the outlook given that CPI
inflation rose above 3% for the first time, triggering an open letter from the Governor, on behalf of the
Committee, to the Chancellor.
Looking ahead, my votes, and my approach to communicating our monetary strategy, will depend on
balancing the medium-term prospect for demand pressures alongside uncertainties about supply
conditions and near-term inflation expectations caused by volatility in energy costs. This will entail
making judgments about a whole range of influences, including whether or not residual slack in the
labour market might in time, given robust business investment, help to ease capacity constraints;
whether or not competitive conditions amongst retailers will dampen the feed through of accelerating
producer prices into consumer prices; and, most crucially of all, whether wage bargainers and price
setters recognise the absolute determination of the Committee to maintain price stability.

Risks to the global capital markets
If anchored inflation expectations have so far been maintained, here and elsewhere, two other risks in,
and for, the global financial environment continue to preoccupy commentators: current account
imbalances; and compressed risk premia, together with an apparently high risk appetite, in credit
markets.
There are, I would suggest, some interesting contrasts between these two risks, which – following the
Bank’s Financial Stability Report – I shall call “global imbalances” and “low risk premia”. They can be
contrasted in two dimensions: the probability that there is some kind of “disequilibrium” that needs to
correct; and the probability that any such correction, or adjustment, will produce destabilising spillovers
in the financial system.
On the first – the probability of adjustment – it is widely agreed by economists that one symptom of
global imbalances, the US current account deficit, is unsustainable. It cannot continue indefinitely at
the same rate because eventually the US’s external debt-servicing burden would become too great.
That there will be adjustment, somehow or other, is therefore viewed by most commentators as near
certain. By contrast, while the low risk premia across credit markets are hard to explain, no one can
say for certain that they are unsustainable. A number of changes in the environment point towards
some sustainable reduction in risk premia: more credible monetary regimes; more flexible labour and
product markets, helping economies to adjust to nasty shocks; improved instruments and markets for
managing risk; better diversified portfolios. Whether or not that merits the degree of risk premia

1

2

The importance of communication to monetary policy was explored more fully in Tucker P M W (2006a), “Reflections on
operating inflation targeting”, Speech at Chicago Graduate School of Business, May 2006, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, Summer 2006, pp 212-224.

BIS Review 44/2007

compression seen over recent years is open to question. For some while now, I have encountered few
people in the market who regard credit risk as fairly priced. A distinction is typically drawn – including
in the Bank’s Financial Stability Reports 2 – between a “fast fuse” risk, in which credit is abruptly
repriced; and a “slow fuse” risk, in which cheap credit leads over time to overleveraged borrowers and
so to vulnerability to a deterioration in the global economy. As time passes, attention has perhaps
been shifting to the longer-fuse risk, given signs of a pick up in aggregate corporate sector leverage
and gradual dilution of covenants in loan terms and conditions, most obviously recently in so-called
“covenant-lite” transactions in the leveraged loan market. 3 But, in contrast to global imbalances, no
one can say with complete conviction that a lower risk premia environment is definitely unsustainable,
which may contribute to explaining why few market participants seem prepared to bet on the time or
scale of any correction.
In terms of the second dimension – the probability that any adjustment would be disorderly –market
practitioners at least seem to regard “low risk premia” more seriously than “global imbalances”.
Resolution of the problem of global imbalances could come in various ways, not all of which need
involve an abrupt correction in asset prices or further movements in nominal exchange rates. For
example, the US might obtain greater competitiveness through a depreciation in the dollar’s real value
if inflation in China and elsewhere were to be relatively high for a period. But, for my purposes today,
the key point is that any correction in asset prices would most obviously be concentrated, at least
initially, in the foreign exchange markets and, if associated with a reduced appetite for dollardenominated assets, plausibly in US Treasury yields too – perhaps amplified by various option-like
structures. 4 But these are, of course, the deepest, most liquid markets in the world. So while sharp
changes would no doubt inflict losses through parts of financial system, many practitioners seem to
regard the market dynamics as manageable. Indeed, when in the Bank’s Market Intelligence rounds
we explore this issue, the mechanism that elicits most concern is that any consequent macroeconomic
slowdown – brought about in the US by higher risk-free bond yields or in the euro area by exchange
rate appreciation – might put pressure on the corporate and household sectors after a period in which
credit risk may have been underpriced and so abundantly available. In other words, discussion of
“global imbalances” shades into an exploration of the potential consequences of “low risk premia”. But
more important, the fundamental changes in the structure of credit markets over the past half decade
or so have left many practitioners uncertain about the dynamics of any adjustment. Views vary of
course, with some seeing the system as clearly more resilient than half a decade ago, but on the
whole practitioners seem to be more uncertain about the potential for nasty spillovers from adjustment
in “low risk premia” than in “global imbalances”.

Vehicular finance
This uncertainty stems from changes not just in instruments and markets, but also in institutions – ie in
the nature and structure of financial intermediaries. This is the age of what I call Vehicular Finance.
The key intermediaries are no longer just banks, securities dealers, insurance companies, mutual
funds and pension funds. They include hedge funds of course, but also Collateralised Debt
Obligations, specialist Monoline Financial Guarantors, Credit Derivative Product Companies,
Structured Investment Vehicles, Commercial Paper conduits, Leverage Buyout Funds – and on and
on. 5 These vehicles can fit together like Russian dolls. By way of illustration – and, I fear, slipping for a
moment into alphabet soup – SIVs may hold monoline-wrapped AAA-tranches of CDOs, which may

2

See chapter on “Risks in the international financial system”, in Bank of England Financial Stability Review,
December 2004, p. 50.

3

See chapter on “Shocks to the UK financial system”, in Bank of England Financial Stability Report, April 2007,
p. 16.

4

For example, hedging of Power Reverse Dual Currency Notes might in certain circumstances amplify
movements in the yen; and hedging of Range Accrual Notes, for which the gamma exposure can flip sign,
might amplify yield curve movements. The general question of the potential for dynamic hedging of short
option positions to amplify market movements was discussed in Tucker P M W (2005), “Where are the risks?”,
Speech at The Euromoney Global Borrowers and Investors Forum, London, June 2005, Bank of England
Financial Stability Review, December 2005, pp 73-77.

5

See the Annex for brief explanations.

BIS Review 44/2007

3

hold tranches of other CDOs, which hold LBO debt of all types as well as asset-backed securities
bundling together household loans. (The diagram may, or may not, help!)
What is going on here? One possible explanation is that capital might be being allocated to wherever
its cost is cheapest for a particular desired risk profile. That optimisation involves comparing the capital
charges applied by regulators to regulated institutions; and by rating agencies to various types of
vehicle (SIVs, CPDCs, CDOs, monolines etc). The “smart money” seems to be assembling its own
portfolio of vehicles, so that it can choose from a menu of where to book transactions. One of the
drivers is commonly referred to by practitioners as “ratings arbitrage”. Another was of course Basel I,
which triggered the securitisation of high-quality credits, and for quite a few years fuelled a ballooning
of vehicles whose existence depended on commercial banks providing zero-capital-weighted “liquidity”
lines. Basel II will change all of that. Indeed, if central banks are to understand how the global financial
system fits together, we will need to fathom the reconfiguration that Basel II prompts, including the
potential for risk transfers between banks adopting different steps on the ladder of Standard,
Foundation, Advanced approaches that it makes available. For the same underlying reasons, in
pursuing their mission, central banks now need to follow developments beyond the big banks, and I
am very grateful to the hedge funds, CDO managers and others who contribute to the Bank’s market
intelligence effort.

Does any of this matter?
a)

The dispersion of risk, and central banking instruments

The dialogue is, of course, largely qualitative. Given the variety of vehicles and their use of risk
transfer instruments, it has become a commonplace that “we” no longer know where risk lies. Most
often, the “we” is the official sector, and in particular bank regulators. But “we” might just as well be the
management of banks and dealers.
Some commentators plainly see this as a Bad Thing. Is it? At least as put, I am not so sure.
In the first place, the transfer of risk has been a consequence of the development of wholesale
markets, with reasonably broad participation, in all types of credit risk. Provided liquidity is sustained,
that should aid the system’s adjustment to shocks. It also means that, while regulators, central banks
and other analysts have certainly lost some quantity data, our assessment of credit conditions is
enriched by the availability of a wealth of new price signals.
Secondly, while credit risk transfer markets are new, derivative markets in interest rates, exchange
rates and equity prices have existed – on-exchange and over-the-counter – for approaching two
decades. We have not known where those risks are for quite a long time.
Thirdly, if we “no longer know where the risk is”, that implies that it has been dispersed beyond the
regulated sector. One might think that was a Good Thing. To take an extreme scenario, if risks were
widely and evenly distributed across savings institutions internationally, a very nasty shock causing a
sharp fall in asset markets would not obviously destabilise the financial system. It would obviously
have macroeconomic consequences, by depleting household wealth and raising the cost of capital for
firms. Other things being equal, central banks could respond by adopting an easier path for interest
rates than otherwise, in order to maintain aggregate demand broadly in line with aggregate supply,
with the objective of keeping inflation in line with explicit or implicit targets. Although the original shock
may be nasty, the response would be the routine use of the routine instrument: the price of central
bank money. There is no question of a so-called Greenspan (or any other kind of) “put” here; the focus
would be not asset prices, but the outlook for spending in the economy and so inflation.
This is obviously rather different from a similarly nasty shock producing severe disorder in a banking
system that was carrying unduly concentrated exposures of some kind. For a central banker, banks
matter because their liabilities are used as money, they are at the centre of the payments system, and
they carry an associated asset/liability maturity mismatch. 6 Banking system distress is therefore
typically characterised by a liquidity run. Faced with that, a central bank’s instrument – used, where
necessary, in collaboration with its regulatory and finance ministry partners – is to supply the system

6

4

Chaplin G, Emblow A and Michael I (2000), “Banking system liquidity: developments and issues”, Bank of
England Financial Stability Review, December 2000, pp 93-112.

BIS Review 44/2007

with an increased quantity of its money, without necessarily changing its price. Given the need to take
collateral to protect against risk, and to charge a premium to create the right incentives, establishing a
routine framework for such operations without creating moral hazard remains “work in progress” for
the international central banking community. 7
So it would seem that there is a good deal to welcome in the greater dispersion of risk made possible
by modern instruments, markets and institutions.
But there are most certainly qualifications to such an apparently alluring conclusion.
b)

The banking system’s residual risk, stress testing and transparency

The banking system retains risk in a number of ways, both pre- and post-risk transfer, and its
aggregate balance sheet has in fact expanded considerably. 8 Pre-risk transfer, banks and dealers
hold, or finance, warehouses of portfolios of loans to households and corporates on their way to
securitisation, 9 meaning that the banking system can still find itself “holding the parcel” when the
music stops. Post-risk transfer, some risk is contingently retained by virtue of banks and dealers
financing the acquisition of risk by hedge funds and others. This entails counterparty credit risk and,
taking account of collateral, is akin to writing out-of-the-money put options.
So, for me, the question is not so much “where is the risk?”, as “in what circumstances could risk flow
back to the banking system?”; and “do banks have enough capital and liquidity to absorb such flows
without stress?”
This is relevant not only to credit risk, but also to transfers of complex market risks. In providing
bespoke “solutions” to their corporate and investment management clients, investment banks
accumulate complex market risk exposures that are hedged largely in public, and so relatively “vanilla”
wholesale markets. These hedges are inevitably imperfect. Some of the residual market risk is now
occasionally transferred to the fund sector, via for example variance swaps or correlation swaps,
transforming market risk into counterparty credit risk – underlining the importance of the work of the
industry’s Counterparty Risk Management Group in debating and promulgating prudent practices. 10
Other imperfectly hedged risks are retained, leaving intermediaries with so-called “basis risk” – or,
more prosaically, the risk that assumed correlations break down. Put bluntly, if instruments A and B
have subtly (or not so subtly) different characteristics but are nicely correlated for a while, B might be
employed as a “hedge” for A, without the implicit risk exposure turning up in Value At Risk measures.
When a shock hits and the correlation breaks down, the hedge breaks down too, with a double
whammy to VaR and so, for regulated firms, to regulatory capital requirements: through higher
volatility, and a higher measured exposure. To be clear, this is not the fancy of the ivory tower. As
discussed in the Bank’s latest Financial Stability Report, it was one of the factors contributing to the
recent volatility in the market for US sub-prime mortgage securitisations. Indeed, this hazard may
conceivably have increased during a period when markets have not been especially volatile.
If investment banking entails warehousing optionality and complex forms of basis risk, it puts a
premium on stress testing. Speaking as a policy maker, I would want so-called macro stress tests to
be complemented by more fine-grained stress tests in which management explore the exposure to
complex risks given their qualitative understanding of their business, and taking into account the
possibility of impaired market liquidity. In other words, risk managers need to do “market intelligence”

7

The Bank of England took some steps in this direction as part of the fundamental reforms to its Sterling
Monetary Framework market operations in summer 2006. The role of central banks in accommodating sharp
(velocity) shocks to the demand for their money was discussed in Tucker P M W (2004), “Managing the
central bank’s balance sheet: where monetary policy meets financial stability”, Lecture to mark the fifteenth
anniversary of Lombard Street Research, London, June 2004, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Autumn
2004, pp 359-382.

8

A fuller explanation is in Tucker P M W (2006b), “Macro, asset price and financial system uncertainties”, Roy
Bridge Memorial Lecture at the Annual Conference of the ACI – Financial Markets Association, London,
December 2006, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring 2007, pp 122-130.

9

The composition of the balance sheets of Large and Complex Banks is discussed at greater length in Tucker
P M W (2006b), op. cit.

10

Report on “Towards Greater Financial Stability: A Private Sector Perspective” by the Counterparty Risk
Management Policy Group, July 2005.

BIS Review 44/2007

5

within their own firms. My sense is that that view is shared by at least some Chief Risk Officers.
Greater transparency of such stress testing would not only shed light on the risks retained by the
banking system, it might also have a productive effect on incentives – rather as greater transparency
has enhanced monetary policy making.

What happens when the music stops: ex ante preparation for stress
But of course severe stress cannot be ruled out. Central banks and practitioners therefore expend
effort thinking about what will happen if and when the music stops.
As the Bank’s latest Financial Stability Report discusses, the official sector has stepped up its practice
exercises of various kinds. The private sector analogue to crisis resolution is the “workout”, in which a
company is restructured under the shadow of insolvency. In a world characterised by bank
intermediation, workouts typically involved bank syndicates co-ordinated by a few lead banks. Even
country workouts in the early 1980s had that broad shape, albeit with the IMF holding the ring. One
might wonder how on earth it would work today, in a world of traded debt, synthetic risk transfer, and
vehicular finance. Much thinking remains to be done on this, but a policymaker has to form a
preliminary view, just in case the music stops tomorrow. My provisional view is that some investors in
credit risk would find themselves without the skill set to participate in a workout. In a “covenant-lite”
world, they might also find themselves with fewer protections as conditions deteriorated than they
would like ex post. Unless markets seized up, however, they might be able to crystallise their losses
by selling out to funds and bank desks who trade in “distressed credit”; and they in turn might be able
to sell on to funds and banks with specialist workout skills and risk appetites. By such transfers, the
end-game co-ordination problems might be reduced. On the way, some hard bargains would be
struck, and some participants would no doubt be surprised by their losses.
But this relatively benign scenario is not guaranteed. It depends on markets continuing to function; on
the infrastructure holding up through volume surges and stress; on the shadow of the insolvency
regimes in various jurisdictions establishing productive incentives; and on lack of uncertainty in the
terms and conditions of market contracts.
That last point needs underlining. In today’s markets, there is a large premium on ex ante clarity and
certainty, as opposed to ex post negotiation amongst bankers who know and trust each other. The
work required is detailed and largely out of the limelight. But getting clarity around things like “close out
netting” may make all the difference when the music stops. 11 The official community therefore needs
to maintain its encouragement and support for private sector initiatives to standardise and improve
documentation. To take just a few examples from what could be a long list, this includes the work of
New York’s Global Documentation Steering Group; of various market trade associations; and of
London’s Securities Lending and Repo Committee, which helps co-ordinate the work of different parts
of the collateral-financing markets. 12

Summary
I have travelled from macro to micro. To maintain the two elements of monetary stability – price
stability, and financial stability – we need credible and effective institutions.

11

Close-out netting is a process by which, following a default, open transactions between two parties are
terminated, each transaction is valued and, together with any outstanding payments, these are reduced to a
single net amount owed by one of the parties to the other. Obtaining legal certainty over recognition of netting
across different products and, in particular, with different legal entities with a common group is very important.

12

The Global Documentation Steering Group (GDSC) is an industry group formed in 1999 to implement the
documentation-related recommendations of the report of Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group
(CRMPG). The primary objective of the Committee is to encourage the harmonisation of documentation in
standard over-the-counter contracts in order to minimise disparities that can exacerbate market, credit and
legal risk. It took the lead in updating the recommendations on documentation issues for the second CRMPG
report released in 2005. GDSC is sponsored by, but independent of, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The hedge fund community is represented on the GDSG. The Stock Lending and Repo Committee, facilitated
and chaired by the Bank of England, provides a forum for practitioners and the authorities to discuss structural
(including legal) developments in London-based securities lending and repo markets.

6

BIS Review 44/2007

At the macro end of the spectrum, that above all means credible monetary regimes. The MPC is now
ten years old. During that period, inflation expectations have been well anchored to our target. And no
one should be in any doubt that the Committee is determined to keep it that way.
But a credible monetary regime does not insulate the economy, or financial markets, against all
shocks. Over the coming decade, some currently observable imbalances will plausibly work their way
through the system, as the pattern of global saving shifts, asset prices adjust, and we encounter,
eventually, a period of corporate defaults. In ten years time, we may therefore know whether “global
imbalances” and “low risk premia” were resolved with or without stress; and we may be better
informed on whether the changes in the structure of our financial markets help or hinder the
preservation of stability. A benign outcome would be more likely if the industry were to maintain its
efforts on improving ex ante measures to handle stress. Managers of hedge funds and other modern
investment vehicles, as well as banks, have a clear stake in that work.

Annex: Vehicles
CDO: Collateralised debt obligation.
Typically, a structured finance product where a SPV issues notes backed by, or referenced to, a
portfolio of underlying assets. The notes issued are tranched by seniority into senior, mezzanine and
equity. The underlying assets could be corporate bonds, loans or structured finance securities (such
as mortgage-backed securities or notes issued by other CDOs), and they might be owned either
directly or synthetically via credit default swaps.
CDO squared.
A CDO invested in CDO tranches, typically mezzanine tranches of synthetic CDOs.
CDPC: Credit Derivative Product Companies.
A highly-rated limited purpose company, with permanent capital, that sells credit protection on
individual names or synthetic CDO tranches. CDPCs differ from monolines in that they write protection
only via credit default swaps. They are in some respects akin to synthetic banks.
Closed-end fund.
An investment company that issues shares to investors and invests the proceeds in a pool of assets
typically stocks and/or bonds. Recently some funds have invested in “alternative” assets such as
hedge funds, private equity and infrastructure, and structured credit. Shares in closed-end funds are
traded like other equities. The funds may issue their own debt to obtain leverage. They may also issue
different classes of shares with different entitlements to income or capital receipts from the underlying
investments.
CP (Commercial paper) conduit.
A SPV that issues CP backed by financial assets originated by one or more sellers. They are generally
supported by liquidity facilities provided by their sponsor or a third-party bank.
DPC: Derivative product company.
A bankruptcy-remote structure that houses credit risk from long-dated derivative transactions. They
are typically wholly-owned subsidiaries of financial services companies. In general, DPCs sit between
their sponsor and an external counterparty in derivative transactions and protect the counterparty from
the potential default of the derivative seller (the sponsor).
Monoline insurance companies.
Monoline insurance companies provide protection against a specific type of risk (typically credit risk).
Originally developed in the 1970s to provide US municipal bond holders with credit guarantees (or

BIS Review 44/2007

7

“wraps”), over the past few decades they have diversified into the ABS and CDO markets (particularly
the highly-rated senior tranches).
SIV: Structured Investment Vehicle.
A SPV that funds a diversified portfolio of highly rated assets by issuing short-term commercial paper,
medium-term notes etc. In general, there is a maturity mismatch between their assets and liabilities.
They aim to generate a positive spread between their return on assets and funding costs.
SPV: Special purpose vehicle.
A bankruptcy-remote company created for the sole purpose of acquiring assets or derivative
exposures and issuing liabilities linked to these assets. Also known as a special purpose entity.

Diagram 1: Interlinkages between financing vehicles

FINANCIAL
ECONOMY

Commercial
paper

Senior
CDO
tranches

CLO

Senior
AAA

Mezzanine
tranche
Equity

Equity

CDO2
Senior
Mezzanine
Equity

CDO
mezzanine
tranches

8

CDO
equity
tranches

Leveraged
loans

Leveraged
loans

Mezz/secon
d lien debt
HY bonds

Corporate
assets

Mezzanine
Equity
HY bonds

Mezz SF CDO

HEL ABS/CMBS

Senior
Senior

CPPI on CDO equity
Principal
protected
notes

LBO’d company

REAL
ECONOMY

Commercial paper conduit (e.g. SIV)

Mezzanine

BBBrated
HEL ABS/
CMBS
or
synthetic

Mezzanine
(often BBB-)

NIM

Mortgages

Equity

Equity

BIS Review 44/2007

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to CBI Wales/CBI CYMRU, Cardiff,
11 June 2007.
*

*

*

Chairman, First Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Two years ago I spent a few days walking along Offa’s Dyke. Up on the ridge, between Hay and
Pandy, there is a magnificent 360° view. The patchwork quilt of green fields in England lies to the east.
But the eye is drawn to the rugged and spectacular scenery of the Black Mountains in “Wild Wales” to
the west. The landscape, however, is not everything because as George Borrow wrote in 1862:
“Wales has something beyond wonderful scenery, its eventful history, and its illustrious men of yore to
interest the visitor. Wales has a population, and a remarkable one.”
It is a population that has had to adapt to great changes in the world economy over the past century
and continues to do so today. You need only look outside at the Cardiff Bay development to see the
way the Welsh economy has changed.
When you take a flight, the aircraft may well have wings made in Wales. Your car might have a Welsh
engine and be insured in Cardiff. And when you holiday in France your morning croissant has probably
been baked in an oven made in Swansea.
What happens in Wales matters for the UK economy. That is why the Bank of England has a team
who live and work in Wales. Last year our Agents – Adrian and Ian – drove 30,000 miles to talk faceto-face with you. The rugged scenery is, I suspect, less appealing to them as they wind their way –
slowly – through the valleys and mountains. When you talk to them, you are speaking to the Monetary
Policy Committee at only one remove before it sets interest rates.
On this occasion, I am not in Wales to enjoy the scenery. I am here to listen to your views at first hand.
But tonight I want to explain.
Over the past year Bank Rate has risen four times to reach 5½%. A year ago, few expected that to
happen – markets thought that by now Bank Rate would be only 4¾%.
Market expectations of where Bank Rate will be at the end of this year have risen from 5% in the
middle of last year to 6% now. So what has happened over the past twelve months?
The right place to start is with inflation – that is, after all, the Bank of England’s target. A year ago
inflation was bang on the 2% target. The latest figure – for April – is 2.8%. In recent months inflation
has been volatile, rising to above 3% in March, when I had to write an open letter to the Chancellor,
and subsequently falling back. The number for May, to be published tomorrow, is awaited with interest.
Many column inches have been devoted to these short-run movements. But, because it takes some
time before changes in Bank Rate affect inflation, it is important that the Monetary Policy Committee
look through this short-run volatility and try to understand where inflation might be heading in the
medium term.
That poses a real challenge. None of us can foresee the future. To assess the likelihood of different
possible outcomes for inflation, we examine all the available information – official statistics, business
surveys, and reports from around the country, including those from our team in Wales. Then we make
a judgement about the outlook for inflation.
That judgement cannot be made on the basis that just because certain developments seem to have
forecast inflation in the past they will do so again. Such correlations are not stable over time. We have
to try to discover the driving forces behind the mosaic comprising all the different pieces of information
that we examine each month. To understand what is likely to happen in the economy, we have to
behave like the child who cannot stop asking “why?” Why is output growing so steadily? Why did
recorded employment fall last quarter? Why are money and credit rising so rapidly? Why have oil
prices picked up? And each answer inevitably provokes another question “why?” So setting interest
rates is not straightforward.
Our job, in fact, is rather like taking part in a “spot the ball” competition. Although the Western Mail and
the South Wales Echo stopped running such competitions in 1992 – at the same moment that the

BIS Review 63/2007

1

inflation target was being introduced – I am sure many of you will remember that in those competitions
the key piece of information, the location of the ball or, in our case, the outlook for inflation, is missing.
You are shown the position of the players from which you have to deduce the position of the ball. That
is no easy matter. To pinpoint the ball you need to ask: why is that player jumping? Or why is that
player looking there? Only when you have identified the factors to which the players are responding
can you try to spot the ball itself. And obviously in our case there is rather more than guesswork
involved.
In essence, each month the Monetary Policy Committee is trying to identify the changes in the driving
forces to which the economic data are responding. Those changes are described, somewhat
obscurely by economists, as “shocks”. That is not to say they are necessarily sudden, violent
upheavals. “Shocks” are forces that stop the economy running with clockwork regularity. They are the
answer to the question “why?”
The Monetary Policy Committee is constantly engaged in an exercise of “spot the shock”. Without
understanding why the economy is moving in the way that it is, we cannot gauge correctly where it
might be going and hence set the right course for interest rates. There is no mechanical link between
any piece of data and inflation – despite the impression often created by newspaper headlines. Policy
cannot be set by a simple scorecard. There is no substitute for asking the question “why?”
One of the achievements of Alan Greenspan during his time as Chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board was his recognition that when output growth picked up in the United States in the late 1990s it
reflected an increase in supply capacity as productivity growth rose in the wake of the application of IT
to business processes generally. This “supply shock” meant that output could expand faster without
generating inflation.
“Spotting the shock” is a perpetual challenge for us. The shocks we have identified are the reasons we
raised Bank Rate four times over the past year. We spotted them by asking three questions, all
beginning with “why”. So let me give you those questions and our answers.
The first question is why total output has grown steadily at an annualised rate of around 3% for 18
months – the longest run of stable output growth since 1997 and much stronger than most
commentators anticipated, even though interest rates and the sterling exchange rate have risen. And
why are business surveys even more upbeat? Notwithstanding a slowdown in the United States, the
world economy, especially the euro area, our largest export market, has been surprisingly buoyant.
World GDP growth over the past three years has averaged over 5% a year, the strongest such period
since the late 1960s. And business investment has expanded at the fastest rate for almost a decade.
These upside demand “shocks” have not – at least so far – been offset by a slowing in consumer
spending.
Given past relationships, we might expect some upward pressure on inflation. But we should be
cautious. Like the US in the late 1990s, we have experienced our own positive “supply shock” in the
form of a significant wave of inward migration, especially from the accession states, of people looking
for work. That has reduced the risk of a rising demand for labour leading to faster wage inflation.
But despite greater availability of labour, businesses have not over the past year expanded
employment sufficiently to prevent stronger demand from increasing capacity pressures. The Bank’s
Agents report that capacity utilisation is now at an unusually high level. These pressures encourage
businesses to raise prices. And that is exactly what the business surveys suggest has been
happening. A position in which growth is above its long-run average and businesses are already
operating with pressures on capacity is unlikely to be one without inflationary risks. That is one reason
why the Monetary Policy Committee has raised interest rates over the past year.
The second question is about money and credit. The quantities of broad money and bank lending are
now around 14% higher than a year ago – rates of growth last seen in 1990 when inflation was more
than 8%. But again, we should be cautious. If credit becomes cheaper and more widely available,
thereby increasing the stock of money (a “money supply shock”), households and businesses will
increase their spending on goods and services and on assets, both financial and real, and this will
push up on inflation. But if they wish to hold more money in their portfolios – a “money demand shock”
– then the extra money will have few, if any, implications for inflation.
So why have money and credit been growing so rapidly? Given the pace of their expansion, it is likely
that there has been both a demand and a supply shock. The supply shock is that banks have become
increasingly willing to provide finance. Credit has been readily available and the spread between

2

BIS Review 63/2007

interest rates paid by households and businesses and interest rates available in the money market has
fallen. That is one factor behind the rapid growth of business investment spending over the past year.
In light of the greater availability of credit, any person or family that borrows at a variable rate should
recognise that the interest rate they will pay in the future may vary. Obvious though the point may
seem, it is unwise to borrow so much that the repayments are affordable only if interest rates remain at
their initial levels. Indeed, wider and cheaper availability of credit was a “shock” that boosted spending,
and so was a further reason why the Monetary Policy Committee raised interest rates over the past
year.
The third, and most important, question is about inflation. Why has it picked up so sharply over the
past year? Are those changes temporary or more persistent? The recent rise in inflation to over 3%
does look temporary. The pickup in the months leading up to March this year reflected in part a rise in
domestic gas and electricity prices. And the fallback in inflation which has already begun, and which is
likely to continue for several months, is in part the result of cuts in domestic gas and electricity prices
which have already been announced.
Those shocks are relatively easy to identify. But it is much harder to know where inflation would have
been without them. Sharp rises in the prices of energy and food have squeezed spending on other
goods and services, putting downward pressure on those prices. That is why measures of “core
inflation” that strip out certain prices can be highly misleading. Even accounting for the temporary
influences, more persistent inflationary pressures have picked up. Some of that stems from the shocks
to demand and credit supply that I described earlier. And against that background, expectations of
inflation over the next year, on which price and wage decisions are based, have drifted up. That is the
third reason why the MPC has raised Bank Rate.
Those are the shocks we have spotted. A boost to supply from inward migration has not compensated
for a positive shock to both domestic and overseas demand. And it would be optimistic in the extreme
to suppose that the rapid growth of money and credit could be dismissed solely as a positive shock to
the demand for money. So there has been some underlying upward pressure on inflation that is in part
hidden by the volatility in domestic energy prices.
That is the past. What about the future? Our central view is that inflation will fall back this year as the
rises in domestic gas and electricity prices last year drop out of the annual comparison and the recent
cuts in prices feed through to household bills. Looking through those temporary effects, if inflation is
then to remain around the 2% target businesses will need to expand employment to relieve pressures
on their capacity. And they will need to do so with only a limited impact on pay. Average earnings
seem so far to have been subdued, although the two main official measures of pay growth are sending
conflicting signals and the Committee awaits an explanation of their divergence.
Faster employment growth and lower domestic energy bills will, by boosting real incomes, add to
consumer spending. With continued robust growth of the world economy, the past rises in Bank Rate
will need to slow domestic demand. And inflation expectations will need to fall back in line with the 2%
target.
The Monetary Policy Committee will be watching closely indicators of capacity pressures, pricing
intentions and inflation expectations. If these indicators remain elevated, the MPC may need to take
further action. There is no simple or self-evident answer to the question of what path of interest rates
will be necessary to bring inflation back to the 2% target and keep it there.
By now you must be asking your own “why?” question – why is he keeping us from such a splendid
dinner? So I will not detain you. I have tried to explain this evening why interest rates have gone up.
Each month we try to spot the shocks, evaluate their implications for inflation, and set interest rates to
meet the 2% target. We do that to provide a backdrop of macroeconomic stability so that you can
focus on the really important questions for your businesses. Why is that product selling better than this
one? Why is my competitor changing his prices? And, most important, why did the Wallabies run the
Welsh defence ragged in Brisbane, where Wales lost by almost as big a margin as England did to
South Africa?
I don’t have the answers to those questions. But, of one thing I can assure you, in terms of the
economy we will never stop asking “why?”

BIS Review 63/2007

3

Paul Tucker: Central banking and political economy – the example of the UK’s
Monetary Policy Committee
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the
Bank of England, at the Inflation Targeting, Central Bank Independence and Transparency
Conference, Cambridge, 15 June 2007.
*

*

*

Over the next couple of days, this conference will take forward debates on many of the strategy issues
preoccupying monetary economists and policy practitioners. The role of inflation targets and
communication in anchoring inflation expectations. The place of money in central bank analysis and
policy frameworks. Whether to be transparent about any expectations policymakers form about the
path of their policy rate.
After more than a decade in which monetary authorities across the world have generally succeeded in
maintaining price stability, it is hard to know whether these continuing debates – and, more important,
the variations in central bank practices that underlie them – are vital or peripheral. Time will tell. Some
architectural features of monetary regimes are plainly important and, unsurprisingly, are broadly
shared: central bank independence; a definition of price stability that, with credibility, can act as a
nominal anchor; a forward-looking “reaction function”. Within that broad canvas, the remaining
variance in central bank practice may owe something to differences in the governance structure for
their decision taking, and to the genesis of those differences.
Alan Blinder has deftly set out 1 a spectrum of decision taking structures ranging from one individual,
the Governor; through committees that are more or less collegial, with either a clear leader or a more
collective approach; to committees, such as the Bank of England’s MPC, that are individualistic.
Blinder and others identify advantages in a committee approach of some kind, essentially on the
grounds, based on analysis or experiment, 2 that committees will generally make better decisions.
That may leave out something rather important. Which is that in some countries a committee structure
has been a pre-condition for achieving central bank independence in the first place. And that is a
useful reminder of the political economy conditions in which monetary regimes are constituted and
operate. Context matters, including possibly to some of the issues on your conference agenda. The
UK’s post-war journey to monetary credibility illustrates that rather neatly.

Environmental preconditions for independence: ideas and values
For a long time, price stability simply was not the core objective of macroeconomic policy. A Bank of
England piece in the late 1960s 3 described government’s twin goals as having been to improve trend
growth and maintain high employment, to which was subsequently added balance of payments
sustainability. When, in the mid-1970s, the UK suffered the indignity of having to borrow from the IMF,
the Cabinet split over the Fund’s stability-oriented programme. 4 And the Thatcher government, elected
shortly afterwards, failed to command broad-based support for a medium-term framework for reducing
inflation explicitly founded on “monetarism”, which became a loaded term, widely perceived across UK
society as part of an ideology. In other words, sound money or price stability was not viewed as an
objective that could be shared across the democratic political spectrum. 5

1

See Chapter 2 in Blinder, A. S., 2004, The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press.

2

Lombardelli, C., J. Proudman and J. Talbot (2005), “Committees versus individuals: an experimental analysis of monetary
policy decision making”, International Journal of Central Banking, May 2005.

3

“The operation of monetary policy since the Radcliffe report: text of paper presented at a conference “Radcliffe – ten years
after”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, volume 9, number 4, 1969.

4

Burk, K. & and A. Cairncross, 1992, "Goodbye, Great Britain": the 1976 IMF crisis, Yale University Press.

5

I say democratic, because enemies of democracy have seen debauching the currency as a means to their ends. For
example, “The best way to destroy the capitalist system is to debauch the currency” is attributed to V. I. Lenin by J. M.
Keynes in The Economic Consequences of the Peace, 1920, p. 235.

BIS Review 66/2007

1

This was, perhaps, apparent in the famous 1981 letter of the 364 economists which stressed that “the
time has come to reject monetarist policies”. 6 Whatever the merits or demerits of its conjunctural
points, the letter made no mention of an objective of low and stable inflation, or of the fiscal
sustainability that is a precondition for monetary stability. Indeed, it is striking that, in this country, price
stability was not energetically promoted by the mainstream academy. Rather, the case was made by
what seems to have been a relatively small group of public intellectuals, 7 together with a few
academics and officials. Drawing on the work of US macroeconomists, UK policymakers reached four
broad conclusions that have endured: that macroeconomic policy should not assume that there was a
long-term trade off between inflation and output; that microeconomic policy should be assigned the
task of improving the supply side of the economy; that only monetary policy could achieve and
maintain price stability; and that medium-term fiscal discipline was needed for any monetary regime to
be credible. 8 Elements of that were controversial at the time. And views within the official sector on the
acceptable rate of inflation covered a broad spectrum. By the early-mid 1980s, some were apparently
prepared to settle for inflation of around 5%, or at least were concerned about the output costs of
further disinflation. Others, notably Eddie George, argued that inflationary expectations could be
stabilised effectively only if inflation were lowered below that. 9 Whilst affirming a commitment to
reduce inflation further, 10 politicians did not resolve these debates by articulating a medium-term goal
for inflation. Money was believed to be more controllable than inflation so, during this period,
objectives, targets/indicators and instruments tended to be considered together, a monetary target
being expected to deliver all three. Ministers were, in consequence, drawn into highly technical
debates, rather than focusing primarily on articulating high-level macroeconomic objectives. But both
money targeting and, subsequently, exchange-rate targeting failed in the UK. That meant that
attempts by politicians to deliver effective monetary policy by binding themselves to a policy rule based
on an intermediate target had failed. So attention gradually turned to broader institutional solutions,
leading ultimately to “operational independence” for the Bank.
In terms of the political economy, there were perhaps two crucial developments during the first half of
the 1990s. First, there was much greater transparency. An inflation target was announced by
government, making the objective clear and performance in achieving it easy to monitor. The Bank’s
analysis of the inflation outlook was published in the quarterly Inflation Report; and its advice to the
Chancellor on the level of interest rates was published in the minutes of the “Ken and Eddie Show”.
This revolution helped to establish the legitimacy of what the monetary authorities were trying to
achieve; helped to demonstrate the Bank’s competence; and showed that differences of view about
the level of interest rates could be disclosed without the ceiling coming down.
Second, a lot more was done, by the Bank and others, to establish support for the goal of price
stability – not as a political tenet but as a technical prerequisite for a well-functioning economy. This
ran through the speeches of Robin Leigh-Pemberton, Eddie George and Mervyn King in the late
1980s and early 1990s, as well as in Bank research. Analytically, energised by the current Governor
when Chief Economist, the Bank put resources into analysing the costs of inflation, and into
contributing to the so-called time-consistency literature on the central importance of mechanisms to
underpin trust in a monetary authority’s declared commitments. 11 And in more public spheres, Eddie
George’s speeches in the early 1990s repeatedly stressed the emergence of a consensus,
domestically and internationally, about macroeconomic policy goals and means. Price stability was not

6

See Letter to The Times from 364 Academic Economists, April 1981.

7

Notably Samuel Brittan and Peter Jay. See, for example, Sir Samuel Brittan’s 1981 paper “How to end the “monetarist”
controversy: a journalists reflections on output, jobs, prices and money”, London: IEA.

8

See Lawson, N., 1984, “The British Experiment”, The Fifth Mais Lecture at City University Business School, June.

9

These differences of emphasis emerged during the review of macroeconomic policy objectives and instruments discussed in
Chapter 36 of Lord Lawson’s book “A View from Number Eleven”.

10

See Nigel Lawson’s 1984 Mais Lecture, op. cit..

11

In 1992, Governor Leigh-Pemberton gave a lecture entitled: “The case for price stability”. As well as reviewing the costs of
inflation, the lecture reprised the early-1980s debate on the rate of inflation the authorities should settle for (see Note 9), in a
section entitled “Why not settle for 5%?”. These issues were also the centrepiece of the Bank’s tercentenary conference in
1994 on the future of central banking. See Fischer, S, “Modern Central Banking”, in Capie F., C. Goodhart, S. Fischer and
N. Schnadt (eds.), 1994, The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England, Cambridge
University Press. See also Briault, C., 1995, “The costs of inflation”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, February. And
Haldane, A. (ed.), 1995, Targeting Inflation: a conference of central banks on the use of inflation targets organised by the
Bank of England, March.

2

BIS Review 66/2007

just an end in itself but a precondition for macroeconomic stability more generally: for sustainable
growth in output and employment and, thus, for the “good things in life”. A precondition, but not a
sufficient condition. The Bank took care to stress that, however effective, monetary policy could not
deliver economic prosperity on its own. It was a necessary condition. And it could avoid the costs of
inflation, including random and unacceptable redistributions of wealth between savers and borrowers
resulting from unexpected surges in inflation caused by the authorities choosing to loosen monetary
conditions.
Two observations might be made about the case the Bank was making. First, there is a conviction that
the long-term health of the real economy is affected by the monetary regime. In the jargon, money
neutrality but not “superneutrality” which, put broadly, holds that monetary regimes are irrelevant to the
long-run performance of the real economy. 12 The way I think about this is that low and stable inflation
can bring two (related) benefits to the real economy. Relative price signals will be clearer, aiding the
efficient allocation of resources. And greater macroeconomic stability will reduce risk, reflected in
lower risk premia and so in a lower effective cost of capital for firms and households, as well as
possibly in longer investment horizons.
Second, some of the arguments might have seemed to shade into a “moral” case for price stability,
which has recently been excoriated by Willem Buiter 13 on the grounds that it has typically come
packaged with central bankers presenting themselves as akin to spiritual leaders who are above
needing to explain their actions to the public. Well, I don’t think we had much truck with central
banking as religion, and from the early 1990s the Bank could reasonably claim to have been in the
vanguard of transparency. But there did run through our corridors a sense of outrage that homes,
livelihoods and businesses could be destroyed by quite unnecessary lurches from boom to bust; and
that the economy’s progress was being arrested by the lack of sustained and credible nominal
stability. In other words, central bankers seemed not to believe research results suggesting that the
welfare benefits of macroeconomic stabilisation were small. 14 Caring passionately about the benefits
of price stability is part of what makes us – a bunch of “conservative central bankers” 15 – suitable for
the job.

Environmental conditions for independence: institutions
One might think that would be it; that independence would follow from a consensus being established
around those ideas and values. Not at all, and for good reasons in the UK context.
I recall 16 various arguments being advanced through the 1980s and into the 1990s against
independence for the Bank.
Mostly, they had their roots in the Bank comprising unelected officials, without a democratically elected
minister as its head. Thus, the then Governor was told in the very early 1990s that if the Bank ever
combined responsibility for bank supervision with monetary policy it would be “an overmighty citizen”.
More important, a number of commentators argued that it was a real obstacle to independence that

12

O. Blanchard and S. Fisher in “Lectures on Macroeconomics”, MIT Press 1989, state that “money is said to be neutral if
changes in the level of nominal money have no effect on the real equilibrium. It is said to be superneutral if changes in
money growth have no effect on the real equilibrium.” (note 8, page 207). Given the relationship between money growth and
inflation in the very long run, that means that the rate of inflation has no effect on the real equilibrium. In practice, high rates
of inflation have proved highly variable, injecting uncertainty into the economy, which can have real effects.

13

Buiter, W. H., 2006, “How Robust is the New Conventional Wisdom in Monetary Policy? The surprising fragility of the
theoretical foundations of inflation targeting and central bank independence”, paper presented at the 2006 Central Bank
Governors’ Symposium “Challenges to Monetary Theory”, at the Bank of England.

14

For example, Lucas, R. E., 1987, “Models of Business Cycles, 1985 Yrjö Jahnsson Lectures, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.

15

For the genesis of this term in the literature, see Rogoff K., 1985, “The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate
monetary target”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, volume 100, number 4.

16

From the vantage point of being Private Secretary to Governor Leigh-Pemberton (1989-1992), and later as an official
implementing policy and then heading the Bank’s Monetary Assessment and Strategy Division.

BIS Review 66/2007

3

the Bank would not be able to account for its monetary stewardship on the Floor of the House of
Commons. In a Parliamentary system of democracy, it is Ministers who are accountable. 17
Those circumstances are specific to the UK. Other conditions and histories act as constraints
elsewhere. For example, in Germany, the institution that became the highly independent Bundesbank
was established as part of the country’s reconstruction after WWII and so before its new democracy
was embedded. It had “goal independence”. And in the US, while there is hesitation over giving the
Federal Reserve an inflation target, as great weight is placed by Congress on the “dual mandate”,
there is not concern about the scope or mechanics of the FOMC’s accountability to Congress. Every
member of the executive arm of the government is unelected except the President. The central bank is
no outlier. 18 But in the UK it really was a novelty – in a way, a constitutional departure, foreshadowed
perhaps only by the judiciary 19 – to give such a politically sensitive lever to a body of unelected
technicians.
The institutional obstacles to Bank of England “independence” therefore needed institutional solutions.
Responsibility for bank regulation was transferred from the Bank in 1997. The pathway to resolution of
the “democratic deficit” problem had potentially been opened up in the 1980s by the St John Stevas
reforms of Parliamentary Committees which led, over time, to a Treasury Committee with a high
reputation and standing, supported by access to expert advice. In the 1997 reforms, the sphere of
politics was carefully delineated. The goal of price stability is set by Parliament in legislation; and,
within that framework, the Chancellor of the day sets the Bank its target for inflation. So the
democratically elected executive arm of government is accountable to Parliament for the policy
regime; and the Bank is accountable to the government and to the Parliamentary Select Committee for
its operation of that regime. Hence, “operational independence”, not goal independence.
The goal was chosen to be a symmetric point inflation target, providing reassurance to the country that
the Bank would not pursue a bias towards disinflation. And the credibility of the regime was
underpinned by a framework for fiscal policy designed, amongst other things, to maintain a prudent
debt/GDP ratio, and so avoid making inflation a tempting prospect down the road.
There was one other, vital element of the system’s design, also addressing the problem of interest
rates being decided by unelected officials at the Bank. As Eddie George and Mervyn King have now
both disclosed, in the run up to the May 1997 election, the Bank pulled together its thoughts on a
possible new monetary regime. 20 The Bank’s hope was that it might be granted independence if a
Committee established to advise the Chancellor on interest rates, which had featured in the Labour
Party Manifesto, was seen to do a good job. In the event, the incoming government did not need the
intermediate stage of an advisory committee. It created the MPC. The appointment to the Committee
of four outside experts ensured that daylight would be brought into the Bank, and underlined the
architectural role of democratically elected ministers. 21 It also meant that the Committee would reach
its decisions on a “one person/one vote” basis, with that going for the five Bank executive members
too.

17

Thus, a whole chapter of Lord Roll’s pamphlet on the case for independence was devoted to solutions to this problem.
“Independent and accountable: a new mandate for the Bank of England”, report of an independent panel chaired by Eric
Roll, Centre for Economic Policy Research, 1993.

18

In another example, Ulrich Kohli has discussed how the SNB’s consensual approach to monetary policy making is “to do
with” the culture flowing from Switzerland’s multi-cantonal federal political structure. See Kohli, U., 2005, Comment on “The
monetary policy committee and the incentive problem: a selective survey” by Fujiki, H., at conference on “Incentive
Mechanisms for Economic Policymakers”, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, May.

19

The parallel with the judiciary was made in the early 1990s in a speech by Governor Leigh-Pemberton, drawing on work by
Ralph Dahrendorf.

20

See transcript of interview on 1 May 2007 of Mervyn King by C. Giles and S. Daneshku for the The Financial Times on the
occasion of the 10th anniversary of the Bank of England’s operational independence (published 11 May 2007); and
transcript of interview on 30 March 2007 of Lord George by C. Giles and S. Daneshku for the The Financial Times on the
occasion of the 10th anniversary of the Bank of England’s operational independence (published 4 May 2007). As a further
gloss on that piece of history, I should perhaps disclose that, working to Eddie, Mervyn and the then DG , Howard Davies, I
was the Bank official who “held the pen” during that work.

21

As stated in Balls, E and G. O’Donnell, 2002, Reforming Britain’s Economic and Financial Policy, “The role of the Chancellor
in appointing the four outsiders was part of the delicate constitutional balance that was struck in a move towards a legitimate
model of central bank independence consistent with British-style accountability to Parliament.” (page 99)

4

BIS Review 66/2007

This is what I have been leading up to: an “individualistic” committee was a necessary condition for
operational independence in the UK.
In terms of solving the time-consistency problem and establishing credibility, the UK system does not
rely on handing monetary policy, lock, stock and barrel, to a group of “conservative central bankers”; in
terms of the literature familiar to this conference, the system is as much Walsh as Rogoff. 22 The
regime is based on combining an objective set by democratically elected politicians, with clear
accountability mechanisms. One of those mechanisms was triggered for the first time recently when
CPI inflation rose to 3.1% in March, requiring the Governor, on behalf of the Committee, to write an
open letter to the Chancellor about what we thought was going on and what we planned to do to get
inflation back to our target of 2%. As well as providing transparency to commentators and the markets
who are in the business of forming views about our future actions, the letter has proved a useful focus
for public debate, which has almost universally underlined UK society’s continuing commitment to
price stability. The “open letter” mechanism is important to the political economy of monetary policy in
the UK.

A one member/one vote committee
The open letter was an instance of the MPC acting as a collective, represented by the Governor. Much
of the time, most obviously when reaching our monthly decisions on Bank Rate, we are in one
person/one vote mode.
Although now well established, a committee that truly adheres to one person/one vote, and at the
same time pursues its mandate with dedication and integrity, needs nurturing and skilful maintenance.
After all, four of the MPC’s nine members also have executive duties for which they report to the
Governor of the day. And the four other, “external” members expect to renew their careers outside
central banking after a few years of service to the MPC, and so might be thought to have an interest in
maintaining an appropriate profile. But – maybe alone amongst central banks, I’m not sure – no one
doubts that the MPC does decide Bank Rate by a free vote. That this should be so owes a great deal
to the culture of the Committee itself; a culture engendered by its first Chairman and his successor as
Governor, but also by the rest of the membership. This is buttressed by the way in which the Bank’s
Court of nonexecutive directors approaches its statutory responsibility of reviewing the MPC’s
processes, involving annual bilateral meetings with each MPC member. And, externally, it is similarly
underpinned by the Treasury Select Committee holding us individually accountable for our monthly
votes, which are published as part of the minutes of our meetings.
This establishes very powerful incentives for each member to reach their own considered view. There
is no free-riding in the MPC; and our policy debates are full and free. That lies at the very heart of the
MPC’s operation, performance and communications.
Indeed, it might be wondered whether the tone of some of the public scrutiny could set up incentives
to cast minority votes with the aim of demonstrating independence of thought and action. 23 That, of
course, would be perverse. Each member wants their individual decisions to matter – to the current
Bank Rate, and to the expected path of policy and so the monetary conditions embodied in the money
market yield curve. One votes in a minority when one disagrees with the immediate decision and the
strategy it might convey. Occasionally, doing so, with the reasons disclosed in the minutes, can be an
effective way of influencing monetary conditions.
The make-up of the MPC’s majorities and minorities shifts around over time. There are no “blocs” on
the Committee. And there is no distinction between “internals” and “externals” in that respect. Indeed,
apart from the defining characteristic that the internals have full-time executive responsibilities at the
Bank, the main distinction to date is that internal members tend to serve for longer; an average of
around five and three quarter years, compared with just over three years for the external members. 24

22

Walsh, C. E., 1995, “Optimal contracts for central bankers”, American Economic Review, volume 85, number 1, sets out
how a contract between government and the monetary authority can give the latter the incentive to pursue society’s
macroeconomic goals in a time-consistent manner. Rogoff’s “conservative central banker” relies on the central bank being
more averse to inflation than society as a whole.

23

See Gerlach-Kristen, P., 2003, “Insiders and outsiders at the Bank of England”, Central Banking, volume 24, number 1.

24

To date, the time on the Committee served by externals has ranged from a minimum of 1.4 years to a maximum of 8.9
years. For internals, the corresponding range is from 2.25 years to 11 years. These ranges are calculated by including the

BIS Review 66/2007

5

That seems to me to be consonant with the political economy considerations behind the design of the
Committee. The internal members provide a bedrock of accumulated policy expertise and
commitment. The externals, coming from outside the Bank and turning over more frequently, keep the
debate and the process fresh.

Three issues around the communication of monetary strategy
Against that background, how does the MPC’s constitution, and in particular our one person/one vote
decision-making structure, affect our approach to some of the issues on your conference agenda?
Communication of decisions: how individualistic should we be?
The MPC has employed four main communication mechanisms: the announcement of our monthly
decision on Bank Rate; the minutes of those meetings, including details of our individual votes; the
quarterly Inflation Report, containing projections for output and inflation; and public testimony, to
Parliament and via speeches, interviews etc.
This differs in various respects from the practice of some other, more consensual central banks. 25 For
example, we do not routinely include an explanatory statement in the notice of our monthly decision,
preferring to do so only when Bank Rate changes or when we judge that the reasons for a “no
change” decision cannot wait until the minutes are published a fortnight later. And when we do include
an explanatory statement, it is kept as short and simple as possible. That is obviously different from
the ECB and, in degree, from the FOMC.
These choices reflect different circumstances and structures; in the MPC’s case, our “one person/one
vote” governance. I can assure that members of the committee, including the chairman, do not know
what we will decide until it is decided. Ours is not a system that lends itself to the tabling of a draft
statement around which views will coalesce. Rather, any statement has to be crafted to reflect the
view of the majority that emerged at that particular meeting, not an easy task at speed.
We are, in fact, very conscious of the distinction between collective and individual statements. We try
to be clear about which communications are collective, on behalf of a majority or the Committee as a
whole, and which are made by an individual member speaking for themselves. The Inflation Report
projections, for example, represent a “best collective view” or centre of gravity in the Committee,
admittedly not a well defined term. Individual views, when departing from that best collective view,
have occasionally been published. At the Inflation Report press conference, the Governor, Charlie
Bean and I are speaking for the Committee, not for ourselves. By contrast, we speak as individuals
when we give testimony to Parliament or set out our views in speeches.
That this should be understood is, of course, terribly important given that the effectiveness of the
regime depends on the Committee decisions and “policy reaction function” that emerge from our
individual deliberations. Conscious of the need to maintain a delicate balance between centripetal and
centrifugal forces, most past and current members – including me – have opposed incorporating
individually labelled paragraphs into the minutes. To do so would put beyond doubt each month where
each of us stands, but it would also affect the dynamic interactions amongst Committee members. My
reluctance to go down that route stems from a concern that we would slip towards a degree of
individualism where members were no longer listening to each other. It would not be possible for
members to polish their statements after the meeting, as they would then be able to tweak their text,
ever so slightly of course, in the light of the market reaction to our decision and so on. So highly
polished statements would be brought to the meeting, with perhaps even a degree of competition in
the depth of the analysis or the beauty of the prose. But the very point of a committee is that we
26
should listen to each other, and then make up our own minds. That includes trying to persuade one’s

unexpired parts of the terms of existing Committee members, but do not include the terms of Howard Davies and David
Walton.
25

For example, Weber, A., 2007, “Monetary policy strategy and communication”, speech at the Deutsche Bundesbank/Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland conference on “Monetary policy strategy: old issues and new challenges”, Frankfurt, May 2007.

26

See section on “Does discussion help?” in Lombardelli, Proudman and Talbot, op. cit., page 199.

6

BIS Review 66/2007

colleagues. Over the years, 27 I have definitely seen occasions where individual members have altered
their position during the course of a meeting.
In summary, the political economy case for one person/one vote does not entail the equivalent of
postal voting, which I believe would impair the quality of our discussions and so, probably, of our
decisions.
Communication of the Committee’s reaction function: whether to publish an expected path of
Bank Rate
Central bankers know that expectations matter. So they know that delivering their goals requires more
than being able to set the overnight money market rate from one policy meeting to the next. It matters
where agents – businesses, households, financial markets – expect the policy rate to be set in the
future. More than that, it matters that agents have a broad understanding of how the monetary
authority will react to unforeseen developments in the economy; their “reaction function”.
That being so, some central banks have started publishing their expected future path of rates, or a
range for the future path.
This could have advantages. For example, absent a clear agreement and statement of the strategy
being pursued by the Committee, differences amongst members about the monthly decision can
occasionally stem from judgments about how the precise timing of Bank Rate changes would affect
perceptions of the Committee’s future course and so monetary conditions.
But in my book, there are two reasons for not publishing a planned policy path – both related to the
political economy context in which the MPC operates.
First, in a one person/one vote system, I very much doubt that a sufficiently stable majority could be
relied upon to exist to vote, as a majority, for the entire future path of rates (and then to stick to it if
conditions had not changed). And I am not convinced that communication would be aided by
publishing a path made up of segments supported by majorities comprising different groups of
members. In those circumstances, it would be hard to make sense of how individual statements
related to the supposedly collective expected path.
Second, any such statements would be conditional on a whole host of judgments about what was
going on in the economy and about how the economy works. I doubt that, in the UK, our
communication with the public and Parliament would be judged a success if we announced a path,
only to have to explain that we had departed from it because conditioning assumptions A, B …. or X
and Z had been invalidated by the passage of time. Getting across the conditionality might be hard,
but also very important: there could be disquiet if the public felt that it had been misled. There is a
premium, in our polity, of keeping the debate focused on the outlook for inflation.
As I have said to the Select Committee, 28 I would not myself say “never”. I think we must learn from
experience elsewhere.
But that does not mean sitting on our hands. The real need is to convey our reaction function, which
publishing a path for Bank Rate would not obviously accomplish. We need to communicate how we
are likely to react to the different types of shock that can drive the economy away from its steady state
path. A complete specification is not feasible. We do not have a 100% correct model of the economy.
And policy cannot sensibly be described by a simple mechanical rule but, rather, is determined by the
judgment of policy makers, with the composition of the one person/one vote committee evolving over
time. But at any particular time, some possible shocks – and so sources of risk to the inflation outlook
– seem more important than others. As the Governor has announced, 29 the MPC is therefore planning
to do more to explain our collective assessment of risks.

27

Before I was a member of the MPC, I was on the secretariat, so I have attended nearly every MPC meeting since 1997.

28

See response to question 285 in oral evidence to the House of Commons Treasury Select Committee inquiry on “the
Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England: Ten years On”, April 2007.

29

King, M. A. 2007, “The MPC ten years on”, lecture to the Society of Business Economists, May.

BIS Review 66/2007

7

Communications about the transmission mechanism, and the place of money within it
Grasping our reaction function requires an understanding of how we think the economy works.
In its early years, the MPC published a collective document on the monetary transmission
mechanism. 30 And, as part of its evidence to the Select Committee’s “Ten Years On” enquiry, we
recently submitted a collective document on how the economy has developed over the past decade. 31
Much of it is uncontroversial. One issue has, though, come to the fore recently: money. Money is a
good example of how the political economy context affects the outward form of policy regimes. In the
euro area, it was vital for the ECB to do what it could to inherit the credibility of the Bundesbank, and
so it was understandable that the special place of money in the Buba’s communication strategy was
adopted by the ECB. I had first hand evidence of this when I was a member of the Monetary Policy
Sub-Committee of the EMI during the mid-late 1990s (and so before the UK had decided not to join
EMU). A colleague from one of the national central banks said to me after one of the deliberations, “Of
course you guys have the better arguments about monetary strategy, but we will back the
Bundesbank. Their policy record has been outstanding for a quarter of a century. Yours has been
good since 1992, around five years, which just isn’t long enough”.
In the UK, it was almost the other way round given the series of failed attempts to base monetary
policy on a money target during the 1980s. Not only in terms of the substance but also in terms of
building and maintaining support for the regime, the UK has been much better served by an objective
expressed in terms of a target for inflation. It is easier to explain.
But that leaves open the question of what role money should play in our analysis. Some commentators
want money to be important in the transmission mechanism because, after all, inflation is a monetary
phenomenon; others feel that it can be placed to one side on the grounds that it is essentially
endogenous and, after all, the dual of the quantity of money – interest rates – is in our models (more
or less). This is an area where, given our individualistic governance structure, views on the Committee
cannot be expected to be monolithic.
My own view is that it is useful to recover the concept of shifts in the supply of broad money. 32 But
such shifts do not have much in common with the proverbial helicopter drop; households and firms are
not forced to hold the extra money, but respond to the terms and conditions on deposits offered by
banks. The consequences for the macroeconomic outlook therefore depend on the nature of the
underlying shock. For example, if a shock – say to the monetary regime – caused perceptions of
macroeconomic risk to decline, there could plausibly be shifts in both the supply of and demand for
credit. Other things being equal, bank balance sheets – and so broad money – would expand, but it
might be hard to judge the extent of any inflationary impulse coming through a “shock” to the supply of
broad money over and above that stemming from a relaxation in credit constraints and higher asset
prices. Also, although a “counterparts” approach to the monetary aggregates would incline one to think
that shocks to the supply of credit would flow into broad money, changes in the “technology” of
banking and financial intermediation might in some conditions make the connection tenuous. After all,
the intermediation of credit occurs via capital markets and not just across bank balance sheets. That
could matter, for example, if an increase in the supply of credit happened to occur at much the same
time as an increase in incentives or the means for banks to securitise – ie sell – the loans they
originate. In the limiting case, a big positive shock to the supply of credit could coincide with shrinking
bank balance sheets and so negative broad money growth. That is, of course, not at all what we have
33
seen recently. But the thought experiment underlines two things.
First, we need to attend carefully to the underlying drivers. As part of that effort, the Bank has recently
launched a new Credit Conditions Survey, which should enrich our grasp of what is going on.
Reflecting changes in the structure of the financial system, we have included questions on demand for

30

“The transmission mechanism of monetary policy”, a paper by the Monetary Policy Committee, April 1999.

31

“The Bank of England’s submission regarding the economic context”, memorandum submitted in evidence to the Treasury
Select Committee inquiry on “The Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England: Ten years On”, April 2007.

32

See Goodhart, C. A. E., 2007, “Whatever Became of the Monetary Aggregates?”, Peston Lecture at Queen Mary College,
London, and King M. A. K., 2007, “The MPC ten years on”, lecture to the Society of Business Economists, May.

33

See Tucker, P. M. W., 2006, “Macro, asset price and financial system uncertainties”, Roy Bridge Memorial Lecture to the
ACI – The Financial Markets Association, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring 2007, page 127 for discussion on
growth in financial sector money holdings, and page 129 for discussion of the composition of balance sheets of large banks.

8

BIS Review 66/2007

credit from hedge funds and structured finance vehicles, as well as on the terms and conditions on
bank lending to households and firms. Second, we need to be careful in distinguishing the implications
of credit conditions and asset prices from any extra role played by the rate of growth in banking sector
liabilities (broad money). It is plausible that we are capturing all that we need to via the incorporation of
asset prices – and so, at one remove, credit conditions – in mainstream macreconomic models and
analysis. But we cannot be sure, not least because banking intermediation does not feature in those
models, and now do risk premia. As I have said before, 34 we must look at money, as it can be an
“amber light”, but analysis of the monetary aggregates, which means the analysis of the banking
sector balance sheet, often needs to be especially detailed. Sitting at the juncture of the real and
financial economies, central banks should be especially well placed to undertake that analysis.
To be clear, those are my individual views. Our governance structure provides constructive incentives
for each of us to reveal our views on issues of this kind – to each other, and in public.

Conclusion
Much of the world economy has been enjoying a period of sustained macroeconomic stability.
Reforms under a series of governments to enhance the flexibility of product and labour markets have
helped our economies to absorb shocks. But few people doubt that stability requires credible monetary
institutions.
The practice and theory of monetary policy has travelled a long way over the past 15 years or so. As
performance has improved, so more refined questions have emerged about the optimal conduct and
communication of policy. Many of those issues will feature in this conference. My purpose this morning
has been to cast those questions in the context of the political economy conditions in which individual
central banks are constituted and operate, using the UK’s MPC as an example. Central bank
independence is a solution to a political economy problem – time inconsistency. Precisely how that
problem is resolved may legitimately vary from country to country. In the UK, it was achieved only after
democratically elected politicians had done some of the politically contentious heavy lifting in bringing
inflation down, and after a period in which the case for price stability had been made. The monetary
regime introduced in 1997 was necessary to embed credibility. Its detailed design properly reflected
UK circumstances. Circumstances elsewhere differ, and so details in central banking practices vary.
But not every central bank practice everywhere may be optimal, and what is feasible for each
country’s monetary system alters over time. We therefore need to learn from each other, without
imagining that all design features travel safely: learning without proselytising. Academic research plays
a huge role in keeping us intellectually honest, and so in progressing those debates.

34

See Tucker, P. M. W., “Reflections on operating inflation targeting”, speech at the Graduate School of Business, University
of Chicago, July 2006.

BIS Review 66/2007

9

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet for
Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, London, 20 June 2007.
*

*

*

My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Ministers, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Chancellor, this will be your last Mansion House Dinner with the Merchants and Bankers. And I want
to start by warmly congratulating you on your record-breaking period in office, and on the imminent
assumption of the leadership of your party and country. It has been a remarkable decade for the
British economy.
Your decision to grant independence to the Bank of England ten years ago is widely and rightly
regarded as a fundamental improvement to the conduct of economic policy in this country, and we in
the Bank are grateful to you for giving us the opportunity to demonstrate the benefits of an
independent central bank. Your reform illustrates the key principle that institutions matter. Individuals,
however talented, cannot consistently perform well if the institutional structure in which they operate is
badly designed.
For too long the UK economy lurched between success and failure rather in the way that the national
cricket team has recently. Getting the institutions right was a crucial part of the 1997 reforms. Perhaps
there is a lesson here for the ECB – the England and Wales Cricket Board. And I welcome the
changes that you announced last week to make appointments to the Monetary Policy Committee
subject to a more transparent process with a more systematic timetable.
Behind the design of our monetary institutions is a simple principle. I described it last October in a
lecture at Kirkcaldy. It is that the value of paper money depends on trust. Trust that it will hold its
value. Trust that others will accept it as a means of payment.
In particular, our banknotes must be trusted by the public – cash still accounts for over 60% of the
number of transactions. In March the Bank launched a new series of bank notes with enhanced
security features. As an economist, I was pleased that a pioneer of the dismal science should appear
on our bank notes. Adam Smith, who appears on new £20 notes, was a thinker who recognised the
importance of institutions.
Imagine my concern, therefore, when, after 3 ½ years as Governor, I read the following report from the
Wolverhampton Crown Court. “A judge demanded to know why police failed for three and a half years
to arrest a wanted Birmingham man – when all the time he was living at home. Adam Smith,
suspected of passing forged £20 notes, had a fixed address in Edgbaston and was picking up
benefits”. So I hope the introduction of one Adam Smith will hinder the activities of the other.
I am proud of the new £20 notes, but I cannot say the same of our £5 notes. There has been much,
and in my view justified, criticism of their availability and condition. Over the past ten years, the value
of Bank of England notes in circulation has doubled, from around £20 billion to around £40 billion. But
none of that is accounted for by the £5 note for which the value in circulation has remained constant
for fifteen years at some £1 billion. And the average lifetime of the note has doubled. As a result, many
more notes are noticeably soiled and scruffy.
ATMs account for over 60% of all cash obtained by the public. Few issue £5 notes. It is more
economical for banks to stock ATMs with £10 and £20 notes. The problem is not at the production end
– we have an ample supply of new £5 notes waiting to be used. We want to see them in circulation.
There is a need for an adequate supply of low denomination notes that can be used for small
transactions where cash is the predominant means of payment. Such mutual convenience is a public
good, and may not correspond to the private interest of commercial banks.
That is why we must not let this situation continue any longer. The public need £5 notes. The solution
may involve some alteration in the incentives for banks to obtain different denomination notes from the
Bank of England, new arrangements to increase the availability of notes to retailers, and an
improvement in the durability of the notes that we print. So the Bank will be initiating discussions to
see what methods might ensure greater access by the public to new £5 notes.

BIS Review 69/2007

1

Your reforms, Chancellor, encompassed not just monetary policy – through the Bank of England Act –
but also financial regulation – through the creation of the FSA and the 1997 Memorandum of
Understanding between the Bank, FSA and Treasury. There was, however, some unfinished business
in that Memorandum. The Bank of England was given responsibility for the oversight of payment
systems. But it was given no formal powers to discharge that responsibility. Instead it relies heavily on
the influence afforded by its operational role at the centre of the high-value payment system. But that
influence extends only so far.
The time has come to deal with the imbalance between responsibilities and powers. The “plumbing” of
the financial system represented by payment and settlement systems may not be as glamorous as the
trading activity which attracts so many bright young people to work in the financial sector, but it is
absolutely crucial to maintaining stability. To have responsibility without power is the misfortune of the
bureaucrat. The solution, in my view, does not mean more powers for the Bank, but narrower
responsibilities. Proposals are under active discussion among the tripartite partners, and they give me
confidence that the imbalance will soon be resolved.
Financial stability more generally is a topical concern in financial markets. More than one banker and
merchant in the City has said to me recently, “I cannot recall a time when credit was more easily
available”. How worried should we be? Let me begin with the implications for the stability of markets
and institutions before turning to monetary policy.
Securitisation is transforming banking from the traditional model in which banks originate and retain
credit risk on their balance sheets into a new model in which credit risk is distributed around a much
wider range of investors. As a result, risks are no longer so concentrated in a small number of
regulated institutions but are spread across the financial system. That is a positive development
because it has reduced the market failure associated with traditional banking – the mismatch between
illiquid assets and liquid liabilities – that led Henry Thornton and, later, Walter Bagehot to promote the
role of the Bank of England as the “lender of last resort” in a financial crisis.
But the historical model is only a partial description of banking today. New and ever more complex
financial instruments create different risks. Exotic instruments are now issued for which the distribution
of returns is considerably more complicated than that on the basic loans underlying them. A standard
collateralised debt obligation divides the risk and return of a portfolio of bonds, or credit default swaps,
into tranches. But what is known as a CDO-squared instrument invests in tranches of CDOs. It has a
distribution of returns which is highly sensitive to small changes in the correlations of underlying
returns which we do not understand with any great precision. The risk of the entire return being wiped
out can be much greater than on simpler instruments. Higher returns come at the expense of higher
risk.
Whether in banking, reinsurance or portfolio management, risk assessment is a matter of judgement
as much as quantitative analysis. Ever more complex instruments are designed almost every day.
Some of the important risks that could affect all instruments – from terrorist attacks, invasion of
computer systems, or even the consequences of a flu pandemic – are almost impossible to quantify,
and past experience offers little guide.
Be cautious about how much you borrow is not a bad maxim for each and every one of us here
tonight. Ignore the unsolicited emails that rain down on us offering unwanted credit. I received one last
week that began, “We have the solution, Mervyn, for your bankruptcy”.
The development of complex financial instruments and the spate of loan arrangements without
traditional covenants suggest another maxim: be cautious about how much you lend, especially when
you know rather little about the activities of the borrower. It may say champagne – AAA – on the label
of an increasing number of structured credit instruments. But by the time investors get to what’s left in
the bottle, it could taste rather flat. Assessing the effective degree of leverage in an ever-changing
financial system is far from straightforward, and the liquidity of the markets in complex instruments,
especially in conditions when many players would be trying to reduce the leverage of their portfolios at
the same time, is unpredictable. Excessive leverage is the common theme of many financial crises of
the past. Are we really so much cleverer than the financiers of the past?
Concerns about the rate at which credit is being created extend to monetary policy. As I said last week
in Cardiff, it would be optimistic in the extreme to suppose that the rapid growth of money and credit
could be dismissed solely as a positive shock to the demand for money. The spread between interest
rates paid by households and businesses and interest rates available in the money market has fallen.
This has been one of the factors behind the strength of demand in the UK economy over the past

2

BIS Review 69/2007

year. Despite greater availability of labour, businesses have not expanded employment sufficiently to
prevent stronger demand from increasing capacity pressures. Such pressures encourage businesses
to raise prices. And that is exactly what the business surveys suggest has been happening. That
underlying upward pressure on inflation has in part been hidden by the volatility of domestic energy
prices. But it is why we have raised interest rates four times and by 1 percentage point in all over the
past year.
Our central view remains that inflation will fall back this year as the rises in domestic gas and
electricity prices last year drop out of the annual comparison, and the recent cuts in prices feed
through to household bills. But it is important to look through those temporary effects to the outlook
further ahead. The discussion within the Monetary Policy Committee is explained in the minutes of our
June meeting which were published this morning. As ever, there is room for differences of judgement
as to the appropriate level of Bank Rate – as shown by the differing views within the MPC. But every
member of the Committee is determined to bring inflation back to target and keep it there – or as close
to the target as possible – indefinitely.
In the long run, it is of the utmost importance that the right institutions to secure both monetary and
financial stability are in place. I believe they are. Chancellor, you are now moving on. Our country
continues to benefit from the institutional arrangements you introduced in 1997. As that great political
commentator Niccolo Machiavelli noted, “nothing brings a man greater honour than the new laws and
new institutions he establishes”. I encourage you to be equally bold in your next job.
Institutions outlast us all. Over time, they are adapted as we learn the lessons of the past in the light of
a changing present to meet our future needs. Lord Mayor, you know the importance of learning, and
the Chancellor has emphasised again this evening the role of education in shaping Britain’s place in
the world economy. Both the Chancellor and I have been enthusiastic about the theme of your
mayoralty: “City of London – City of Learning”. And all of us here tonight would like to pay tribute to
your work since you became Lord Mayor, and to thank both the Lady Mayoress and yourself for the
splendid hospitality which you have extended to us all this evening.
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to "The Lord
Mayor and the Lady Mayoress".

BIS Review 69/2007

3

John Gieve: London, money & the UK economy
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at The University of Surrey,
Guildford, 26 June 2007.
*

*

*

Introduction
The past year has been one of rapid growth and record profits for much of the financial sector
worldwide. The strength of the world economy has provided a favourable wind but the spectacular
growth of derivative markets and the spate of leveraged buy outs have also fuelled the growth. And, of
course, London has been at the centre of the story.
In a speech in March I discussed the renewed ascent of London as a centre of international finance
and concluded that it was based on powerful economic forces which were likely to persist. 1 I showed
how the leading position London built up in the days when Britannia ruled the waves gave it a strong
comparative advantage based on language, law, time zone and, above all, by a concentration of
expert labour. This allowed London to maintain an important role in international finance even while
Britain’s overall economic and political position was eroded. In the last twenty years we have seen a
resurgence in the City which has established a strong position not just in traditional markets like
foreign exchange, where its share is around 30% of trading, but in new products, with a share in OTC
derivatives markets over 40%. 2 The rapid growth of hedge funds in the West End is the latest example
of the innovation that this cluster of financial skills has produced. You know something must be
happening when the Mayor of New York commissions a review of the threat London poses to New
York’s position.
London’s recent growth certainly has a cyclical element but it also reflects two more structural changes
– the removal of barriers to international capital movements and the advances in information
technology. These have led to a growing role for international capital markets compared to national
banking and to a growing concentration of those markets in a few hubs among which London and New
York are dominant. And this finance revolution is still underway. It is far more advanced in the US than
in Europe and in Europe than in Asia. In the absence of disasters therefore London, as the preeminent centre outside the US, can look forward to a long period of fast growth and expect its share of
the UK economy to increase.
This evening I want to discuss the implications of that trend for the UK economy and for economic
policy. On the first, is London a goose laying golden eggs for the rest of the country or is it more of a
cuckoo in the nest? On the second, how does the growth of London and financial markets generally
impact on the Bank’s core functions of setting monetary policy and maintaining financial stability.
Finally I discuss the impact of financial developments on the growth of money and credit and the
significance of that for the broader economy.

London’s impact on the wider economy
In principle, when one sector of an economy enjoys rapid growth, we would expect to see three broad
developments:
•

rewards earned by factors which are specific to the booming industry rise;

•

unless there are sufficient unemployed resources available, productive resources shift into
the booming industry; and

•

employment in other tradable goods industries falls.

1

Gieve, J “The City’s Growth: The Crest of a Wave or Swimming with the Stream”, to the London Society of Accountants, 26
March 2007.

2

I use “the City” here loosely to cover not just the Square Mile but the whole of London’s wholesale financial sector including
in Canary wharf and the West End. A fuller exposition would also give more attention to successful regional centres
including Edinburgh.

BIS Review 73/2007

1

The results were illustrated by the Dutch experience with gas in the 1960s and by the UK experience
with North Sea oil in the early 1980s. 3 In both cases, part of the mechanism was a rise in the real
exchange rate and consequent pressure on other sectors.
Is that happening now in the UK? It is much harder to identify the impact of the City than the impact of
the discovery of gold or oil. London’s position has developed gradually and the statistics rarely
separate the group of wholesale financial markets and supporting legal, accounting and other services
that make London special from a broader group including retail banking and insurance and business
services. But there is some evidence that all three factors are at work.
The story seems clearest with the specific factors of production. The cost of commercial property in
London, for example, has grown rapidly. According to Jones Lang Lasalle Research, in the City
average capital values are over $25,000 per sq.m, above both Paris and New York. And the costs in
the West End, the main home of the new hedge fund industry, are almost twice as high. There is no
doubt that the success of London’s financial centre is helping to fuel demand for office space from
Canary Wharf to Mayfair.
And of course it is not just commercial property in London that has been booming. House price
inflation in London has outstripped the rest of the UK (Chart 1), and in Kensington and Chelsea
average house prices have risen by almost 40% since the start of 2005, compared with 20% for
Greater London as a whole. ECA International published a survey comparing average monthly rents
for a 70-square metre unfurnished flat in the largest cities and showed London over € 2,100,
compared with New York around € 1,750 and Paris below € 1,500.
The figures on output also show that London has been growing relative to the rest of the country
(Chart 2), and that has reflected the growth of financial and business services compared with other
tradable sectors throughout the UK (Chart 3 and Chart 4). And despite the fall in oil production in the
North Sea, we have seen a rise in the real exchange rate by over 15% when comparing the period
1987-1997 to 1997-2007, although of course the financial sector would not have been the only factor
behind that rise.
More immediately, the GDP figures in May showed that financial intermediation grew by 6% in the
sixth months to 2007 Q1 – an annual rate of over 13%. That is not the same as the City of course; but
there is every reason to think the City has been growing at least as fast as the rest.
However, while the success of the City is currently one factor in these trends, it is not the whole story.
For a start there is a lot more to London than finance. There are other successful industries and, on
the other hand, London is home not just to the wealthiest boroughs but also to some of the poorest
and most deprived areas in the country. As a result it has one of the highest regional rates of
unemployment overall. Secondly employment and profits in the City have been highly cyclical.
On scale first, a recent estimate put the total number employed in “City” jobs, including supporting
professions like lawyers and accountants as well as bankers and asset managers, at around 340,000.
That amounts to about 9% of the total in London; significant but still lower than the number in
distribution or in government services. And the growth of employment will continue to be the net result
from the expansion of activity and from the economies made possible by IT and by the relocation
particularly of back office work to cheaper areas elsewhere in the UK or abroad.
The jobs figures understate the importance of the sector in the economy because on average pay may
be twice as high in the financial sector as in the rest of the economy; 9% of wages and salaries in the
year to March compared to 4% of employment. And within London its share is even greater. The
average earnings of someone working in London’s financial intermediation sector in 2006 were around
£90,000. On that basis, the financial sector might account for around 20% of remuneration in London.
However it is still far from the only game in town. For example the Work Foundation’s fascinating new
report on the creative industries suggests that their growth has contributed at least as much as the
City to London’s overall performance.
Moreover, while the trend is upwards, there is a marked cycle in the financial sector. Over the last 10
years, for example there has been a striking swing in employment with rapid growth during the dotcom
boom followed by a sharp fall and subsequent recovery (Chart 5).

3

2

The UK is a net exporter of financial services, running a surplus in 2006 of £26 billion (or 2% of GDP) on financial services
and insurance. North Sea oil production peaked in 1999, and in 2006 was nearly 40% below this peak.

BIS Review 73/2007

That reflects a strong cycle in financial sector profits (Chart 6) which is an international phenomenon –
indeed, in the last 10 years major European financial firms and US securities dealers saw an even
bigger cycle in their profitability than major UK financial firms (Chart 7).
The same is true for earnings (Chart 8). This reflects the importance of bonuses which account for
around 20% of remuneration in the financial sector compared with around 5% across the economy as
a whole. The figures in the City itself can be considerably higher. A figure of 50% is common in
investment banking, in which a rough rule of thumb is that firms distribute about half their pre bonus
profits to staff. It is estimated that 4200 workers in the City received bonuses worth more than
£1million in 2006/07.
Of course the growth in those bonuses is contributing to the widening inequality of incomes at the top
of the earnings distribution. Chart 9 compares the 90th, 95th, and 99th percentile with the median and
shows that the main change is at the top. If we break that top percentile down further, we see a more
dramatic widening. This is not just true of the City or of the UK. The average CEO in the UK earns
around 100 times more than the average worker but there is an even wider gap in the US, with the
average pay of CEOs over 250 times that of the average worker in 2005, having risen from around
100 times in 1995.
In 1999 Eddie George likened the change in the City since Big Bang to Wimbledon. 4 The UK still
prospered by providing the venue even though most of the players were foreign.
Today I think the Premiership may provide an even better analogy. That is partly because foreigners
now own an increasing number of the venues as well as supplying many of the players. That is a
striking illustration of Britain’s openness to foreign ownership which sets it some way apart from most
other countries both in Europe and America. But it is also because both the City and the Premiership
have become the centres of global industries with a dramatic impact on revenues and on earnings.
One of my first footballing heroes was Johnny Haynes, the David Beckham of his day as a passer of a
football. In the 1960s he became the first player to earn £100 per week (roughly £1500 in today’s
terms) in the British game which was then about four times the average male wage. Top Premiership
players now earn more than 200 times the average wage.
What has changed is the fact that pay is now being set in a world market. We have in the Premiership
as in the City some of the best paid people in an international industry which is developing rapidly. We
have imported the top of the world earnings scale and at a time when the stretch at the top world wide
is increasing very fast.
Just as in the Premiership, the stars of the City – the people who have not just the talent but the recent
experience and networks to perform at the top level today – can command a high proportion of the
returns from being at the hub of the industry. The growth of hedge funds and private equity can be
seen in part as a move by the small group who have sufficient expertise in new instruments and
markets to take more of the returns on ownership. 5
To sum up so far, internationalisation and technology favour the clustering of financial markets in
London so we should expect London to continue to prosper relative to the financial industry worldwide
and to the rest of the UK economy. That will tend to reinforce the trends of recent years with:
•

a continuing shift of resources into the financial markets and into London itself,

•

a continuing pressure for higher rents and rewards for those with the right combination of
talent and experience, but also

•

a strong cycle in profits, pay and employment.

4

E George, "Before the Millennium: From the City of London", 7 December 1999.

5

Even for a footballer, being at your peak at the right time and place is critical to earnings. But with football like athletics, it is
obvious that the best have outstanding talent. It is harder to believe the all the high earners in the City are intrinsically more
intelligent or determined than others whether in universities, hospitals or factories. But the demand for the best paid reflects
not just talent but experience. There may be many people who could run a trading floor given the right training but there are
inevitably only a few who can demonstrate current success in doing so. Experience, like status and talent, is a “positional
good”.

BIS Review 73/2007

3

Implications for economic policy
That leads straight on to the first implication for policy makers. As London strengthens its position in
financial markets, the cycle in international finance will have direct effects not just through the shifts in
interest rates and asset prices but through jobs and pay in an important sector of the London
economy. Any international financial crisis will be important not just because of its knock on effects on
the core banks and markets on which British industry and households depend but because of its direct
impact on the real economy.
The growth of the City also affects the interpretation of some of the core statistics we use to monitor
and assess how the economy is developing, including those on output, earnings and, above all,
money and credit.
First our GDP numbers don’t pick up financial sector very fully. In most sectors the contribution to GDP
is roughly the sum of pay and profits. Measuring the output of the financial sector is more difficult. In
the financial sector some types of banking activity are excluded from the final GDP figures. In 2008 the
ONS plan to expand the GDP figures to include what is called FISIM and reflects those activities of
banks which they cover by their net interest income. 6 That will improve estimates of GDP, but they will
continue to exclude income that banks earn through proprietary dealing. This is probably be right as a
matter of national accounting principle but dealing in securities is a part of what some international
banks do. As a result changes in the level of activity in the City may not be fully captured in the GDP
figures which most economic models, including the Bank’s, use as their summary statistic for the real
economy.
Second the growing importance of bonuses in the financial sector can make it harder to interpret
statistics on earnings. City bonuses are generally paid at the start of the year. As Chart 10 shows this
leads to big peaks and troughs. At times when changes in earnings growth are of great interest, as
they have been in recent months, it is difficult to identify the underlying path.
The difficulty is partly a technical issue of how to smooth out the monthly variations. Do we spread the
bonuses backwards over the last 12 months on the grounds that they are deferred pay conditional on
profits in that period (with the consequence that you don’t know the true earnings figure for any month
until over a year later)? Do you spread them forward because they will tend to be spent over the
coming year? Or do you do a bit of both? To that uncertainty we can add the fact that there several
different measures of earnings growth including two – the AWE and AEI – which are telling a
somewhat different tale. 7
There is also a more conceptual challenge. Are bonuses to be treated as part of the cost of labour or
are they a form of profit sharing? The economic implications may be quite different. In practice they
are probably a bit of both; bonuses are much higher when profits are good, but they are unlikely to
disappear entirely in tough times (witness the concept of the “guaranteed bonus”). But estimating how
they divide up is not easy.

Money and credit
The third area in which the development of financial markets is complicating the interpretation of
statistics is money and credit. And again that is an area of keen attention at the moment. The question
is whether the recent growth of the money supply is telling us something about the prospects for
inflation and the economy that we are not getting from other variables – like consumption, interest
rates, prices, or inflation expectations.
Chart 11 shows monetary growth over 130 years in the UK against consumer inflation. The
association is obvious. But even in the days of the gold standard when the Bank had a more direct
control of the money supply, money growth and inflation diverged for periods (eg in the late
19th century and in the late 1920s). More recently, the growth of money in the 1970s did act as a
leading indication for inflation. But in the early 1980s the relationship appeared to break down despite,

6

“Improving the measurement of banking services in the UK National Accounts", Leonidas Akriditis, ONS Economic and
Labour Market Review, May 2007

7

I have used the AWE in this speech, even though it is the more recent and less well established of the two, because it is
designed to handle outliers at the top and bottom of the ranges better and the City has a disproportionate number of
outliers.

4

BIS Review 73/2007

or possibly because of, the fact that the monetary authorities were explicitly targeting the monetary
aggregates as a means of controlling inflation.
Part of the explanation of the divergence was that the 1980s were a period of rapid financial
innovation following the removal of exchange controls and of pricing, income and dividend policies.
This changed the amount of money people were willing to hold for a given amount of money spending
(which in economics is known as the velocity of circulation). So the increase in money growth did not
lead to a pick up in inflation.
Even so the acceleration of monetary growth at the end of the 1980s did foreshadow the upturn of
inflation at the end of the Lawson boom.
The chart shows that since 1992 the rates of growth in broad money and inflation have diverged again
and that broad money growth has picked up sharply since 2003. A key question is whether this reflects
a further spurt in financial innovation or is telling us that we should expect increasing growth of money
spending and inflation.
There are good grounds for attributing part of the increase to structural changes in the financial
markets which have led “other financial companies” (OFCs) to hold more deposits with the banks for a
given level of economic activity. 8
It is within this OFCs sector that the growth in money has been the most rapid (Chart 12). The view
that much of this growth reflects structural changes of this sort is supported in my view by the way the
spread between deposit and loan rates of interest has vanished in the last few years (Chart 13). Of
course that might be the product of competition between banks to lend more and attract more
deposits; it also seems plausible that much of this lending is more about balance sheet restructuring
than making a profit.
However deposits associated with special purpose vehicles and intra-group only account for part of
the growth. Even if we strip out all OFC deposits the growth rate of money has still been strong
compared with the growth rate of money spending (Chart 14). In my final section I want to discuss
what we should make of this.

The significance of the money supply
In the Treasury in the 1980s I was a close observer of the attempts to find a monetary aggregate as an
intermediate target to guide policy. We were looking for both a predictable relationship between the
policy instrument, interest rates, and the measure of money and a predictable relationship between
that and our final objective, inflation. I remember the frustrations when both links proved unreliable. I
am in no doubt that we are better off focussing directly on our final target, inflation.
However I was struck, returning eighteen months ago to the economic debate, how the place of
money in our debates had changed. Our model, like most others, is “new Keynesian”. As a result, the
discussion sometimes seems to resemble the discussions of “demand management” in the 1970s
more than the monetarist debates of the 1980s. But, if anyone was in any doubt, monetarism was not
dead but only resting. And it has recently taken wing again as persistent monetary growth and rising
asset prices have given us food for thought.
At times the discussion of money can seem detached from the rest of the policy debate. Having listed
all the other aspects of the economy factors – like world growth, consumption, financial markets and
the labour market – “money” emerges as though it was a separate determinant impacting directly on
inflation or inflation expectations like Heineken “refreshing the parts other beers cannot reach”. 9 But
money is very much part of the real world and we don’t need any hidden or ghostly mechanisms to
see how it feeds through credit, asset prices and consumption in the wider economy.

8

The clearest example is the service offered by London Clearing House, where dealers effectively transact with each other
(via gilt repo transactions) across the balance sheet of LCH, which results in an increase in both OFC’s deposits with and
borrowing from banks. Similarly, in the case of a synthetic securitisation of corporate bonds, a special purpose vehicle
(SPV) is set up to issue securities to investors and holds a cash deposit at a bank from which it makes payments if any of
the securitised loans default. Both of these examples result in an increased in measured deposits at banks, but neither
presages more nominal spending.

9

G Ryle “The Concept of Mind” London (1949) Hutchinson. Ryle was criticising as incoherent a dualist view of mind and body
in which the mind is instrumental in determining action but is wholly distinct from the physical realm.

BIS Review 73/2007

5

We need to start as the Governor has said by trying to distinguish supply shocks from demand
shocks. 10 Where growth in money is driven by the wish of consumers or companies to increase their
holdings of money for a given level of spending, there need be no effect on nominal GDP or inflation.
As I have discussed there is clear evidence of changes in demand of that sort in the financial sector.
But that is not the whole story. So have there been increases in supply of money and if so how will
they feed through into the economy?
What does a supply shock look like? It is easiest to visualise in a closed economy in which the money
supply is mainly notes issued by the monetary authorities. One can imagine then a direct increase in
supply – a helicopter drop of extra notes. In that world people would really find themselves with extra
cash in their pockets and would be expected to go out and spend some or all of it. With more money
chasing the same goods, we would see a direct impact, first on money spending, then on inflation.
In the modern world the nearest equivalent to helicopter drops has been the monetary financing of
government deficits. But monetary financing is not a problem we face at the moment, indeed it is not
allowed within the EU under the Maastricht Treaty.
So what we need to be concerned about today is the creation of extra money through the banking
system and the way that happens is through the granting of credit to willing borrowers who borrow to
spend on assets, investment or consumption. The supply changes we need to spot are changes in
banks’ willingness to lend. And we don’t have to look far to find some.
Take, for example, the growth of consumer credit in the UK (Chart 15). We see rapid growth in the late
90s and early years of this century followed by a sharp decline as banks began to see defaults rising.
Another recent example is the sub prime market in the US. Chart 16 shows the arrears rates on
successive cohorts of loans, marking very clearly the reduction in credit quality in 2006 as the market
overshot.
In both cases the figures and the market explanations confirm that these movements reflect at least in
part changes in the supply curve for credit. The borrowers were willing but the banks were also
pushing the supply by reducing costs and conditions (culminating some said in NINJA mortgages – for
those with no income, no job and no assets).
So I have no doubt that we have seen some supply changes to credit. Next we need to distinguish the
sustainable changes from the cyclical. Sustained changes either in the economy or in financial sector
technology may justify some increase in supply. For example, we have seen a long period of low and
stable inflation and unemployment and that is expected to continue. That reduces some of the risks to
lenders and borrowers and may increase both the demand and supply of credit and the value of
assets on a lasting basis. The development of information technology allows banks to collect and
analyse more information about borrowers which should allow them to target credit better and justify a
change in supply. Finally the development of derivative markets has allowed the risks in loans to be
split into their separate components and distributed to the people best placed to bear them. Again that
should lower the supply curve for credit.
All these factors were at play in the consumer credit and the sub prime markets but, despite the new
sophistication of credit scoring and the derivatives markets, they both also showed all the classic signs
of a credit cycle. Banks competed for business by lowering the costs and conditions on lending while
the economy expanded, defaults were few, and profits appeared high. They overdid it, defaults started
to rise, losses were taken and they toughened their terms again. The speed and severity of that cycle
can have implications for financial stability as well as the stability of the broader economy. It is for that
reason that there is a wide acceptance that there may be a case for monetary policy to “lean into the
wind” in a cyclical upswing. 11 That has been one factor in my support for the four interest rate rises of
the last year.
If there is evidence of a cyclical, unsustainable, element in the supply of credit and asset prices the
next questions are:
•

where are we in the cycle, and

10

M King “Speech to CBI Dinner, Wales”, 11 June 2007.

11

C Bean “Inflation Targeting: The UK Experience”, speech at the Annual Conference of the German Economic Association, 1
October 2003.

6

BIS Review 73/2007

•

is the present stance of monetary policy sufficient to bring it back to a sustainable trend or,
given the lags in the impact of interest rate changes, is it set to exacerbate the downturn?

Current conjuncture
So where are we now? The consumer credit market in the UK and the sub prime and broader housing
markets in the US have turned down and, while the sub prime saga is still not played out, it still seems
unlikely that it will have severe knock on effects on the broader economy.
Elsewhere the commercial property in the UK looks to be at or close to its peak (Chart 17).The
housing market is showing some glimmers of a slowdown in activity but prices are still rising fast,
especially in London; indeed the rate of increase of house prices is higher today in nearly every region
than it was last autumn. And there is no sign of a slowdown in corporate lending. Overall lending to
PNFCs is accelerating (Chart 18), investment is high, and on a global basis we are seeing spectacular
growth in the LBO market (Chart 19) and the emergence of lower prices and conditions with so called
“covenant lite” loans.
Against that background the question is whether we have done enough. In reaching a judgement, of
course, we need to take account of the full range of information on the real and nominal economy. We
know that the full impact of past increases in rates has yet to come through. Yet we cannot be sure
how much of a restraint current rates will be at this point in the cycle. It is not surprising therefore that
there are different views on the MPC or that those views change in response to more information.
My stance in recent months has reflected a judgement on the balance of risks taking account of both
probabilities and likely impacts. The risks we face are: first that we may increase interest rates too fast
or push them up too far, with an unnecessary loss of growth, and second that we may raise rates too
slowly with a cost in higher inflation and potentially higher interest rates and a sharper slowdown in the
end.
I voted for a further increase earlier this month partly because I was not convinced that current rates
would be sufficient to bring credit growth and nominal demand back to their long term sustainable
path. I also felt that the impact of moving too slowly on the credibility of the regime and thus the future
prospects for the economy was of greater concern, given the robust rate of growth, than an
unnecessary slowdown in activity. In reviewing the position again in future months I will be watching
the trends in the growth of credit and money carefully.

BIS Review 73/2007

7

8

BIS Review 73/2007

BIS Review 73/2007

9

10

BIS Review 73/2007

BIS Review 73/2007

11

Nigel Jenkinson: Promoting financial system resilience in modern global
capital markets – some issues
Speech by Mr Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at the
conference, Law and Economics of Systemic Risk in Finance, University of St. Gallen, St. Gallen,
29 June 2007.
This speech has been prepared with my colleague Mark Manning. I am very grateful to Mark and to Joanna Perkins for her input
on legal risks, and to Ben Norman, Victoria Cleland and Andrew Bailey for their comments.

*

*

*

The changing nature of risks
Spurred by rapid innovation, we are currently witnessing a period of major structural change in
financial intermediation and the global financial system. Financial market activity is growing at a
tremendous pace. For example, over the past five years, the credit derivatives market has grown
spectacularly from around $1 trillion notional amount outstanding in 2001 to around $20 trillion in 2006
(Chart 1) and the issuance of leveraged loans has increased almost three-fold (Chart 2). The balance
sheets of the major global financial institutions (the so-called large complex financial institutions or
LCFIs) have more than doubled since 2000, fuelled by an increase in trading assets (Chart 3).
Turnover in the UK and US foreign-exchange markets has risen by around 50% in only the last couple
of years. And capital market integration is rising rapidly as barriers to cross border flows have come
down. Taking a longer sweep, over the past 35 years cross border asset holdings having risen more
than six-fold in terms of world GDP (Chart 4).
Financial innovation has delivered considerable benefits. New products have improved the ability to
hedge and share risks and to tailor financial products more precisely to user demand. That has
enabled financial intermediaries and users of financial services to manage financial risks more
effectively, and has lowered the costs of financial intermediation. And innovation and capital market
integration have facilitated the wider dispersal of risks, which may have increased the resilience of the
financial system to weather small to medium-sized shocks.
Innovation has also delivered new challenges and vulnerabilities. Dependence on capital markets and
on sustained market liquidity has increased, as banks and other intermediaries place greater reliance
on their ability to “originate and distribute” loans and other financial products, and to manage their risk
positions dynamically as economic and financial conditions alter. In turn that places additional
pressure on the robustness of financial market infrastructure to handle large changes in trading
volumes and to cope with periods of strain. And the greater integration of capital markets means that if
a major problem does arise it is more likely to spread quickly across borders. So as highlighted by a
number of academics and authorities, 1 the flip side to increased resilience of the financial system to
small and medium-sized shocks may be a greater vulnerability to less frequent but potentially larger
financial crises.
Benign economic and financial conditions in recent years have kept credit losses at low levels.
Combined with buoyant returns from capital market activity, the profitability of major financial
institutions has been strong. And capital levels are high. But as highlighted in Financial Stability
Reports by the Bank of England and others, this benign environment has encouraged an increase in
risk-taking and a “search for yield” which has lowered the compensation for bearing credit risk and
market risk to very low levels. The vulnerability of the system as a whole to an abrupt change in
conditions has consequently increased.
Against this background, I would like to focus my comments today on some of the implications for the
management and reduction of risks to the financial system as a whole. More specifically, how can the
public policy goal of promoting systemic financial stability be best achieved? I will not provide a fully
comprehensive answer to this question but will touch briefly on four aspects; improving the
assessment of vulnerabilities that might threaten stability; developing appropriate buffers for capital

1

Financial
System
Risks
in
the
UK
–
Issues
and
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2006/speech280.pdf

BIS Review 77/2007

Challenges

(John

Gieve)

(July

2006)

1

and liquidity within the financial system that take due account of the changing nature of risks;
strengthening the core market infrastructure; and lowering legal uncertainty.

Systemic stress-testing
As financial markets evolve and new vulnerabilities are exposed, it becomes increasingly important
that both market participants and the public authorities improve their understanding and assessment of
threats to financial stability, and take steps, where appropriate, to contain and lower them.
The Bank of England has been active in the development of models to identify and assess potential
sources of major vulnerability to the UK financial system 2 and is, with the Financial Services Authority,
engaged in a dialogue with practitioners, both to understand better current approaches to measuring
risks under stressed conditions and to encourage improvements and the sharing of best practice in
stress testing techniques.
Recent distress in the US sub-prime lending market, and the collapse of the hedge fund, Amaranth,
have exposed weaknesses in risk management, including in the management of contingent, or offbalance sheet, exposures. Although developments in the sub-prime market of course continue to
unfold, the impact on conditions in broader financial markets has to date been relatively contained.
But, in a more severe stress scenario, perhaps in a more significant market such as corporate credit,
or one in which several areas of vulnerability were exposed in combination, the impact could have
more serious consequences for the financial system.
This highlights the potential value of a more rigorous assessment of tail-end risks. In particular, stresstests by financial institutions should attempt to incorporate the behavioural responses of other firms
which may have a substantial impact on market conditions. For instance, scenarios should take
account of the extent to which many firms might respond to a common shock in a similar way, with
potential implications for market prices or market liquidity. The likely amplification of price moves as
financial institutions attempt to exit “crowded” trades and liquidity dries up is an important example.
Indeed, given the importance of market liquidity for the efficient execution of banks’ dynamic hedging
strategies and for their activities in the wholesale funding and credit risk transfer (CRT) and
securitisation markets, it is essential that stress tests factor in extreme, yet plausible, scenarios for
liquidity conditions in these markets, recognising that market liquidity can evaporate very quickly,
particularly for complex structured financial instruments. And it is also essential to factor in increased
liquidity needs linked to contingent calls, associated, for instance, with funding margin payments.

Capital and liquidity buffers
A sizeable buffer of capital and liquidity can help a bank to withstand a shock that threatens its
solvency or would otherwise leave it with insufficient liquidity to meet its obligations as they fall due.
But a bank’s private choice as to the size of its capital or liquidity buffer may not be aligned with the
socially optimal choice, as firms will not naturally take account of (or “internalise”) the implications of
their distress or failure on the financial system more broadly – for example through the possibility of
contagion to other firms and impairment of the financial intermediation system. That provides the
justification for prudential regulation.
I will not dwell here on the value and importance of capital adequacy standards in containing systemic
risks – enough has been written on the Basel Accord and Basel II, such that this is well understood.
However, consistent with my earlier comments on stress-testing and the importance of modelling
behavioural responses, it is crucial the authorities understand banks’ likely responses to changes in
minimum capital requirements over the business cycle. In this regard, the Bank and the Financial
Services Authority (FSA) have recently developed a framework for monitoring the potential for procyclicality in credit conditions. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Committee of
European Banking Supervisors are working on similar frameworks internationally.

2

2

Financial Stability Report (April 2007) (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/fsr/2007/fsr21.htm) & FS Paper No.2: “A
new approach to assessing risks to financial stability” (Haldane, Hall and Pezzini) (April 2007)
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/fsr/fs_paper02.pdf)

BIS Review 77/2007

Capital adequacy standards are usefully complemented by “large exposures” rules. In particular, the
application of such rules recognises the importance of addressing the risks from an unforeseen event
that could cause a bank to incur serious loss, and that major problems could spill over from one bank
to another given the network of interconnections. A European Union-wide review of the Large
Exposures Directive is underway, offering the opportunity to improve the resilience of the financial
system to such spill overs, including in the inter-bank market.
Rather less has been written about liquidity buffers and prudential liquidity standards. Given their
balance-sheet structure, funding liquidity is a key risk for banks: the transformation of short-term
liabilities into long-term assets leaves them structurally vulnerable to liquidity pressures. Banks
therefore need to position themselves so as to be able to withstand extraordinary demands on their
liquidity. If capital markets work efficiently, a solvent bank in need of liquidity should, in principle,
always be able to rely on the market to obtain funds. However, in practice, the interbank market may
not always work perfectly; asymmetric information and coordination failures are among the most
severe potential frictions. Banks may, therefore, find themselves unable to access normal sources of
funding liquidity. The measures to which a bank in this situation would have to resort, such as large
scale asset sales, could have major adverse spill over effects through the system, as could the most
extreme case of an outright failure to meet obligations as they fall due. Liquidity buffers may help in
this regard: a bank holding a buffer of assets that is reliably liquid under conditions of stress, perhaps
with a core component that is eligible as collateral at the central bank, should always be able to
access liquidity in a way that avoids precipitating severe market disruption.
The trends described at the outset are also important here. First, a shift to greater reliance on
wholesale funding and greater involvement in capital market activity more broadly perhaps makes
banks more exposed to funding liquidity pressures than in the past: they are at the mercy of nimble
wholesale lenders. And with internationally active banks managing multi-currency balance sheets, a
local approach to liquidity regulation is becoming less relevant. It is for this reason that the Basel
Committee for Banking Supervision decided to convene a Liquidity Working Group to take stock of
prudential approaches internationally and to explore whether there is a case for greater consistency.

The critical role of infrastructure
The financial market infrastructure – exchanges and the systems used to clear and settle market
trades or cash obligations – also plays a critical role here. Market participants rely on such
infrastructure to implement their desired portfolio allocation; to execute risk management strategies; to
raise liquidity, both in normal course and in times of stress; and to manage contingent exposures and
cash-flows. It is therefore important for financial stability that these systems function efficiently and
continuously, and do not introduce unnecessary costs, risks or frictions to trading and post-trade
processes. Frequent interruptions to pre- or post-trade processing, or excessive costs in accessing
core components of the market infrastructure, can impose significant welfare costs. Under such
circumstances, agents may be forced to deviate from their desired portfolio allocations and risk
exposures, or indeed may be prevented from meeting their obligations as they fall due. With markets
for credit risk transfer (CRT) growing rapidly, there has been an expansion in the range of transactions
for which robust, resilient and well-designed infrastructure is essential.
Market failures in infrastructure provision and single points of failure
It is instructive to consider why providers of the market infrastructure and their members might, left to
their own devices, invest too little in resilience and risk-mitigation. The answer lies in the
microeconomics of infrastructure provision, and, in particular, the presence of market characteristics
such as network externalities, increasing returns to scale and coordination failures.
By network externality, I refer to the incremental benefit derived by existing owners of a particular good
or service when another party purchases that good or service. For instance, the broader the
participation in a particular exchange or trading facility, the more extensive the trading opportunities
and the deeper the liquidity; as a result, the greater the potential benefits from membership of that
exchange. Equally, in the case of post-trade infrastructure – clearing and settlement systems – the
greater the volume of transactions cleared or settled, the greater the potential for netting exposures
and/or cash-flows (or in gross payment and settlement systems, the more efficiently liquidity can be
recycled).

BIS Review 77/2007

3

Increasing returns to scale reflect the fact that infrastructure provision is, by and large, a fixed-cost
business: once an investment has been made in the information technology supporting the trade,
clearing or settlement of a given volume of transactions, the marginal cost of each transaction up to
the capacity of the system is very low.
But the market characteristics imply a tendency towards natural monopoly in the provision of
infrastructural services and hence dependence on a single, non-substitutable provider: often termed a
“single point of failure”. A monopolist provider of infrastructure services may face insufficient incentive
to innovate – including in risk-reduction – and, importantly, may not fully internalise the potential
effects of a disruption to its services on the financial system as a whole, thereby undervaluing system
resilience from a public policy perspective.
But couldn’t the users of the infrastructure ensure that the monopoly provider invested more heavily in
risk mitigation? And with many infrastructures being user-owned cooperatives, would there not be a
natural mechanism for this?
Perhaps – and indeed there is evidence of effective risk-mitigation among user-owned providers, for
example the throughput guidelines on payment flows to lower liquidity risk in CHAPS, the UK high
value RTGS payment system, was led by member initiative. But such risk mitigation may still not be
enough to meet social welfare goals fully.
First, the effects of a disruption are likely to be felt beyond what may be a narrow group of direct users
of the infrastructure. That is, the effects may be systemic; for instance, there may be an interruption to
the flow of liquidity via dependent markets or systems, or among participants relying on the system
indirectly, for example through a correspondent banking relationship.
Second, users may place insufficient value on systemic stability because material operational failures
are low-probability events and difficult to anticipate. Their assessment horizon may also be shorter
than the social optimum.
And, crucially, coordination failures may be a factor: users of a particular infrastructure, many of whom
may compete in underlying markets, need to coordinate their actions if they are to influence decisions
on the future strategy of the infrastructure provider. Investment in the reduction of operational risk will
be one such decision. Difficulties in organising effective bargaining among users may leave them
unable to coordinate, particularly in the face of differences in their information, expectations or
preferences. Potential welfare-increasing actions may, therefore, not be carried out.
These market failures may justify intervention by the public authorities: either via a continuous
oversight or regulatory regime; via targeted intervention; or maybe even via public ownership, as is
often the case in respect of large-value payment systems and sometimes with securities settlement
systems. An alternative strategy when faced with a monopoly provider might be to promote (or even
set up) alternative, competing suppliers, to improve market contestability while ensuring adequate
interoperability and substitutability across systems. Of course, given the existence of network
externalities and increasing returns to scale, the cost of this form of risk mitigation may well be higher
than the cost of regulating a natural monopoly on an ongoing basis.
Most typically, public intervention would seek to address the vulnerability stemming from single points
of failure by the imposition of minimum standards of resilience on monopoly (or near-monopoly)
systems, either to reduce the probability of operational failure; or to mitigate the impact of such failure
by improving contingency arrangements – for instance, via increased investment in back-up facilities.
Steps might also be taken to improve general risk management practices and mitigate the risk of exit
of a key infrastructure; financial resilience and business risk is an important consideration here.
A regulator or overseer might also (or alternatively) seek to narrow the gap between the choices of a
monopoly provider and the social optimum by encouraging more effective and inclusive governance
arrangements. User- as opposed to external-ownership might be promoted, though, as previously
noted, this might not be enough. Other measures might include steps to clarify the scope of the
system’s activities, admissions criteria, voting rights, transparency, and the role of external
stakeholders.
For instance, in the UK, overall governance of payment systems is carried out via the newly-formed
Payments Council. This body is headed by a governing board comprising a (non-voting) independent
Chair, four independent directors, and eleven directors from the payments sector. The board is
expected to consult with key stakeholders before determining strategy, and before making important

4

BIS Review 77/2007

decisions. Transparency is also enhanced via the publication of an annual report, with a separate
contribution by the independent directors, and the publication of board minutes.
Finally, we should not underestimate the importance of users themselves building resilience within
their own operations to single points of failure in infrastructures. For the very same reasons that
monopoly infrastructure providers may tend to under-invest in resilience from a public policy
perspective, even where run as user-owned cooperatives, financial institutions might also need
supervisory encouragement to invest in work-around measures to deal with disruptions at the level of
the core infrastructure.
Other sources of systemic risk
The existence of single points of failure is not the only manifestation of systemic risk in infrastructures,
as the behaviour of agents within the systems can lead to problems spilling over to other participants
given the interconnections and strategic interactions. For example, if a large net provider of liquidity to
a real-time gross settlement payment system were to face severe operational difficulties which left it
unable to make payments, other banks within the system might find themselves short of liquidity, and,
in extremis, some might be unable to meet their own payment obligations. Behavioural responses,
such as payment delays and liquidity-hoarding, might then exacerbate the problem within the payment
system, potentially also spilling over to activity in other systems and financial markets. And, where a
system is integral to the implementation of monetary policy, a disruption could directly affect a central
bank’s ability to set overnight rates and maintain confidence in the currency.
Although this variant of systemic risk does not originate directly in infrastructures, system design can,
nonetheless, help mitigate the impact. Features of the design and operation of an infrastructure can
help to lower risks of this type – for example, by introducing collateralisation and loss-sharing rules,
net sender limits and throughput guidelines to promote efficient liquidity recycling – so that failures do
not give rise to financial contagion. Again, left to their own devices, users will lack an incentive to take
into account fully the costs imposed outside of the system and they again face acoordination
challenge in effectively implementing system design or rule changes to reduce such effects.
Infrastructure robustness and the changing nature of risks
Some of the financial market trends identified earlier have placed additional pressure on potential
shortcomings in the financial infrastructure, attracting the interest of the public authorities and, in some
cases, prompting targeted intervention. I would like to discuss two of these: financial market
innovation; and the global linkages and system interdependencies that arise from the emergence of
large cross-border banking groups.
Financial market innovation
Taking the first of these, over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets have grown rapidly in recent
years, particularly in the credit sector, driven in part by the shift towards an “originate and distribute”
model of banking finance and by greater recourse to credit risk transfer to manage and hedge risks, as
well as increasing activity by insurance companies, hedge funds and institutional investors in this
sector. The infrastructure for OTC derivatives has, however, lagged behind.
Notwithstanding the emergence of new automated vendor services in recent years, OTC derivatives
trades continue to be cleared and settled on a predominantly bilateral basis. Hence, a party to such a
transaction is dependent upon the ongoing creditworthiness, liquidity and operational robustness of its
counterparty over the life of the contract. A sound legal basis for the trade is, of course, also critical.
Rising volumes (and values) and the development of new, and often more complex, products have
placed a strain on existing arrangements, exposing capacity constraints in existing procedures.
Questions have also been raised over the risk implications of deficiencies in post-trade processes,
most notably in the assignment of credit derivatives contracts.
Progress towards addressing these deficiencies was initially relatively slow, held back by coordination
failures in the dealer community, until the regulatory community took an interest in 2005. The issue
was noted in the Bank of England Financial Stability Review and the UK’s Financial Services Authority
helped to bring the issue to public attention. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) later
convened a group of 14 dealers and their regulators, encouraging them to set targets for the reduction
of processing backlogs in credit derivatives and to put in place mechanisms for speedier post-trade
processing going forward. The dealers were encouraged to embrace existing automated services for

BIS Review 77/2007

5

the delivery and matching of confirmations, and the industry was propelled rapidly towards the
adoption of a Protocol for communicating trade assignments. The group was also encouraged to work
with vendors, notably the Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation (DTCC), to implement solutions
providing a framework for ongoing processing efficiency and data integrity. The result was the launch,
in November 2006, of DTCC’s Trade Information Warehouse.
In parallel, the Basel Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems has been investigating
developments in the OTC derivatives space more generally, updating work carried out in 1998 to map
the landscape and identify risk issues. The Committee published a report in March 2007.
The report recognises that the clearing and settlement infrastructure has been strengthened
significantly in recent years, noting, in particular, the progress in automating and centralising key posttrade functions. But the report also highlights that there is more to be done. For instance, while
processing backlogs in credit derivatives have been reduced substantially, they remain sizeable in
other product lines. Recognising that the group convened by the FRBNY has been effective in
resolving co-ordination problems, the report argues that momentum from the credit initiative should be
carried across to other products. An initiative is already under way in this regard, with the FRBNY
group having been expanded to 17 firms and a broader range of products. Firms are working towards
targets for backlog reduction. Automation is a key element of this initiative, although it is recognised
that there needs to be interoperability between core vendor services if the benefits are to be realised.
One implication is that further public intervention might be required should coordination problems
undermine the incentives to deliver such interoperability. And, as the OTC derivatives market becomes
more dependent upon centralised providers of post-trade services, public authorities will need to
consider whether established international standards for operational reliability of infrastructures should
be applied to emerging new systems.
Global linkages and system interdependencies
The rapid growth of capital market integration and of large cross-border banking groups (often termed
large complex financial institutions or LCFIs) and the increased international linkage between
infrastructure providers also has significant implications for the assessment and reduction of systemic
risk arising in or from the financial infrastructure. Specifically in an Anglo-Swiss context, for instance,
we have seen Switzerland's SWX Group establish in London back in 2001 the recognised investment
exchange, virt-x, as a cross-border trading platform, which offers central counterparty (CCP) clearing
with both LCH.Clearnet Ltd and SIS x-clear AG, and settlement through CrestCo Ltd, Euroclear Bank
and SIS SegaInterSettle AG. The Swiss CCP, x-clear, also plans to join LCH.Clearnet Ltd in clearing
the London Stock Exchange.
Infrastructure providers have responded positively to the demands of an increasingly internationally
oriented customer base by offering settlement links – which facilitate cross-border collateral and
liquidity management – and clearing links – which allow margin offset with respect to positions held in
related assets in different centres.
Cross-border mergers between infrastructures are also becoming more common. For example, in
recent years, the UK’s central counterparty for derivatives, London Clearing House (LCH) Limited
merged with Clearnet SA, while the Euroclear Group acquired CREST, the securities settlement
system for the UK and Ireland. The Euroclear Group currently provides domestic securities settlement
services in 5 European countries as well as international settlement services. Such tie-ups are of
course an international extension of the microeconomics of infrastructure provision outlined above,
exploiting economies of scale and network externalities. But, at the same time, they introduce common
business risks and cross-border dependence on core systems, thus providing another channel for
problems to spill across borders. Such cross-border linkages consequently add a layer of complexity
to supervisory arrangements, making international coordination among the public authorities essential.
Linkages arising at the user level are again important here. As banks operate in multiple markets,
there is increasing scope for shocks to propagate across borders. That may arise from the increased
centralisation of banks’ liquidity risk management. To the extent that banks use the foreign exchange
markets to recycle surplus liquidity in one system to meet a shortfall in another, or else take advantage
of settlement links between securities settlement systems to transfer collateral across borders, liquidity
risk may be reduced. But, to the extent that banks respond to the availability of mechanisms for
reallocating liquidity between systems by reducing their aggregate holdings, a bank may be more
vulnerable to simultaneous liquidity demands across markets or to operational disruption to such
mechanisms.

6

BIS Review 77/2007

The Basel Committee for Payment and Settlement Systems has again been looking closely at issues
arising from international integration of banks and infrastructures. In recent years, the Committee has
published a report exploring mechanisms for the cross-border use of collateral, and in the context of a
broader report on central bank oversight of payment and settlement systems, has established a set of
principles for international cooperative oversight. Work is also continuing to map more formally the
nature of international interdependencies between systems, and thus of cross-border risks.

Legal certainty
No matter how safe and resilient the market infrastructure, a sound legal basis for transactions is
essential if the financial markets are to fulfil their role in effectively allocating scarce capital.
Financial markets operate within legal systems that not only regulate the behaviour of participants for
the good of the markets as a whole, but also safeguard the property and contractual rights of those
participants. Prospective market participants will have greater confidence to invest or to seek finance if
they feel confident, first, that the regulatory obligations and sanctions imposed upon them are
predictable and, second, that the contractual rights/obligations which they acquire/undertake can be
identified with certainty.
Furthermore, market discipline is likely to be enhanced if participants’ legal/contractual rights and
obligations are precisely defined; the introduction of an ambiguity into the law can unsettle financial
markets or exacerbate existing instabilities. Legal/contractual uncertainty is therefore a potential
source of systemic risk. Two aspects of legal certainty are particularly crucial:
Contractual certainty
One key element of a stable legal framework is contractual certainty. Systems of contract law that
show respect for formal agreements help to drive down commercial risk and therefore to promote the
efficient allocation of capital. And uncertainty as to the enforceability of contracts is likely to be
particularly damaging to financial markets. Against this background, contracts are becoming longer
and more complex as financial innovation continues apace: the documentation for a structured finance
product can often run into several hundred pages, thus raising the important issue of “documentation”
risk.
Legal and regulatory stability
Another key element is legal and regulatory stability. This is very important to the financial markets,
where the ability to form complex plans with a degree of confidence as to the stability over time of
external influences (such as legal rules) impacts directly on risk, price and, ultimately, the efficient
allocation of capital. A stable planning environment is conducive to investment and, therefore, market
growth. Examples of harmful consequences of ambiguities in legal/regulatory frameworks include
uncertainty as to the extent and scope of regulatory obligations or sanctions, and uncertainty as to
how old laws will apply to dynamic and fast-changing market practices.

The Financial Markets Law Committee (FMLC)
In recognition of this, a number of countries have established groups of experts to promote greater
legal certainty in financial markets. In the UK, the Financial Markets Law Committee was established
in 2002. Its objective was to identify issues of legal uncertainty which might give rise to material risks,
and to consider how such issues might best be addressed. The Committee seeks to meet this
objective, first, via liaison with industry and market participants to identify those areas of legal
uncertainty with potentially adverse impacts, and, second, by working with market experts to propose
solutions.
One area in which the FMLC has been active in recent years is in encouraging the development of a
smoothly functioning legal framework for cross-border transfers of intermediated securities. In 2005,
the Committee undertook a thorough analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of harmonisation
of the private international law in this area, as reflected in the Hague Convention. It was, and still is,
widely accepted that such harmonisation would contribute to legal certainty by facilitating a clear
identification of the law governing the holding and transfer of indirectly-held securities. This is

BIS Review 77/2007

7

particularly important in the context of the cross-border use of collateral: a key element of banks’
global liquidity management strategies. Early in 2006, the FMLC published a paper that undertook a
full analysis of the Convention and expressed strong support for its central propositions.
The FMLC’s work in this (and other) areas has been well received and has contributed to the decisionmaking process for government at the national and supra17 national level. Indeed, overall, the
Committee has had some notable successes in addressing and ameliorating legal uncertainty in the
financial markets context.

Concluding remarks
To conclude, the rapid structural change in global financial markets is providing considerable benefits
to users of financial services, by lowering the costs of financial intermediation and improving the ability
to manage and hedge financial risks and tailor financial products. But recent developments also
provide new challenges and sources of vulnerability as financial markets become increasingly
integrated, and as participants place increased reliance on sustained market liquidity to manage their
risks. While financial institutions are in a strong financial position, risk taking has increased and the
vulnerability of the financial system as a whole to a sharp change in conditions has risen. Against this
background, and given the considerable uncertainty regarding how many new complex financial
products would perform in more strained market conditions, it is important to improve the analysis and
understanding of tail risks through systemic stress tests and thereby strengthen risk management, to
ensure that financial institutions retain strong buffers of capital and liquidity, and that investment in the
financial and legal infrastructure keeps pace with market developments and thus ensures that it
remains robust and resilient.

8

BIS Review 77/2007

BIS Review 77/2007

9

10

BIS Review 77/2007

Nigel Jenkinson: Developing a framework for stress testing of financial
stability risks
Comments by Mr Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England,
at the ECB High Level Conference on “Simulating Financial Instability”, Frankfurt am Main,
12-13 July 2007.
I am very grateful to Adrian Penalver, Prasanna Gai, Geoff Coppins and Piergiorgio Alessandri for input and
helpful comments.

*

*

*

1 Developing a rigorous, coherent and robust framework to analyse the resilience of the
financial system to withstand strain presents many well-known and formidable challenges.
Financial system behaviour is very difficult to model, particularly under stressed conditions
when strategic interactions between participants and risks of spillover and contagion come to
the fore. And, thankfully, episodes of stress are rare, so history offers only limited assistance.
2 We are currently witnessing a period of major change in financial markets. The global
financial system is evolving at a tremendous pace, fuelled by rapid innovation and
crossborder integration, and supported by lower macroeconomic volatility. Innovation and
integration may have a profound impact on the behaviour of the financial system under
pressure. In particular, risks may have been dispersed more broadly through credit risk
transfer and increased participation in capital markets. The resulting reduction in credit risk
concentration may have strengthened the robustness of the financial system to withstand
small to medium shocks. But equally, greater market integration has strengthened the ties
between financial firms within and across borders, both through direct exposures and
through common exposures to asset markets. If a shock is sufficiently large, the financial
network may consequently act as a conduit for transmitting rather than absorbing risk. So the
flip side of greater integration is that it may have lowered the frequency but increased the
magnitude of potential financial crises. 1
3 Improving the toolkit for financial stability analysis is consequently a very high priority for
public authorities and for major financial institutions. Enhancing the capability to model the
financial system under stress is the key challenge.
4 In recent years, many central banks and supervisory agencies, charged with the public
policy goal of supporting the maintenance of financial stability, have sought to develop a socalled “top down” or “macro” stress-testing capability. Utilising information on balance sheet
exposures, the authorities draw on macroeconomic and financial models to try to assess the
impact of adverse shocks on the financial system. Several inter-related high level objectives
can perhaps be set for an “ideal” stress test:
•

To assess the vulnerability of the financial system to extreme but plausible shocks

•

To improve the understanding of the transmission of shocks through the financial
system (and, in a worst case, the potential propagation of financial crises)

•

To identify “weak spots” in the financial system, to guide risk reduction priorities and
crisis management planning

1

Systemic risk in modern financial systems: analytics and policy design by Prasanna Gai, Nigel Jenkinson and
Sujit Kapadia, Journal of Risk Finance Vol8, No2, 2007. Financial System Risks in the UK – Issues and
Challenges (John Gieve) (July 2006) www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2006/speech280.pdf .

BIS Review 81/2007

1

To deliver these objectives effectively, the aim is also to use a rigorous and consistent
analytical framework which integrates behavioural responses, interactions and feedback
effects, to ensure that the system-wide implications are fully captured
5 So where is current practice against that ideal? A typical or traditional “macro” stress test
has the stylised form set out in Chart A. The first stage is to put together a coherent stress
scenario, typically using a macro-econometric model (which may include some assumed
endogenous policy response). By mapping important propagation channels, an estimate of
likely financial sector credit losses is produced; for example, by modelling the impact of the
macro stress on corporate and household balance sheets and gauging the consequent
impact on the probability of default and likely recovery rate on banks’ credit exposures.
Market losses are estimated by judging the impact of the macro stress on different asset
classes. Total bank losses are calculated by aggregating credit and market losses, perhaps
including an additional allowance for the impact of the stress scenario on net interest income
and on funding costs. Expected losses are then compared to the buffers of profits and capital
(perhaps with an adjustment for whether the scenario is likely to be “slow burn” wherein
potential future profits might absorb some of the loss, or “fast burn” where pressure falls
more immediately on capital) to guide the judgement on the overall impact of the stress
scenario on the banking system (and/or on the financial system more broadly).

6 We have utilised this broad approach within the Bank of England to assess the risks to the
major UK banks from sources of potential major vulnerability – both individually and in
combination. Results have been published in recent Financial Stability Reports (see Chart
B). 2

2

2

Bank of England Financial Stability Report June 2006 and April 2007. The description above applies
particularly for the corporate, household and global imbalances stress. See A new approach to assessing risks
to financial stability by Andrew Haldane, Simon Hall and Silvia Pezzini, Bank of England Financial Stability
Paper No 2 April 2007 for a fuller discussion.

BIS Review 81/2007

7 This approach has a number of strengths. First, it draws on a fully consistent
macroeconomic scenario and on statistical estimates of the impact of adverse economic
conditions on credit and market exposures. Second, building formal “maps” of transmission
of economic shocks onto the financial system facilitates greater analytical consistency and
provides enhanced clarity on which channels are important. This aids the understanding of
risks. It also highlights which channels are explicitly included in the stress tests and which
are not, and are consequently priorities for future work. Third, sensitivity analysis can easily
be carried out to assess the impact of altering behavioural assumptions – for example, what
would happen if write-off rates on corporate exposures were higher than expected? Fourth,
the results can be compared to “bottom-up” stress tests calculated by individual firms, which
have developed rapidly in recent years, but which may be less focussed on capturing
macroeconomic and financial sector feedbacks.
8 The traditional approach to stress testing, nonetheless, suffers from some major limitations.
Most strikingly, the current treatment of key financial system interactions and feedback
effects is often rudimentary. Given that such effects are crucial in assessing the vulnerability
to contagion and system-wide stress, that is a significant drawback. Take the illustrative
severe stress scenarios published in the Bank of England Financial Stability Report and
shown above in Chart B as a guide. These scenarios are constructed from risk transmission
maps for each scenario based on the stylised model in Chart C. In practice, however, there
are important gaps, as can be seen from Table 1, where the channels which have been
explicitly quantified in the stress scenarios are shown. In particular, the potential amplification
of the shock within the financial system through channels such as an endogenous fall in
market liquidity as firms simultaneously seek to lower risk exposures; dynamic hedging
behaviour (particularly of “unbalanced” options positions) 3 ; and restrictions on lending (a

3

Bank of England Financial Stability Report July 2006 Box 5, Page 33.

BIS Review 81/2007

3

“credit crunch” or “financial accelerator” effect), are not yet built in empirically. And the
framework does not yet incorporate the potential contagion and spillover effects which would
result from severe strain at, or the default of, a major bank or financial institution.

4

BIS Review 81/2007

9 At present, the results from the top-down stress tests consequently tend to be relatively
“linear”; that is an “extreme” scenario is a “scaled-up” version of a more “moderate” scenario.
As financial instability is by nature inherently non-linear, given the central focus on default,
contagion and spillover, this is an important failing. Moreover, the stress-tests typically
concentrate on the impact of particular adverse scenarios, which individually have a nearzero probability of occurring in practice. There is generally no attempt to derive a distribution
of possible outcomes.
10 Addressing these limitations is an important priority for financial stability authorities, so
that “practical” stress-testing meets the “ideal” objectives set out above. Within the Bank of
England, we are building a suite of models that allow the transmission channels for potential
financial system stress to be mapped out accurately and comprehensively, including in the
form of loss distributions. The outputs can also be compared to measures of financial system
buffers, such as profits, to provide summary statistics of systemic vulnerability. 4 Others too
have been pursuing a similar course. For example, the Austrian central bank has developed
a Systemic Risk Monitor to characterise the interaction between shocks and the structure of
the banking system and inform the internal policy debate. 5
11 A schematic for the planned suite of models is set out in Chart D and will be described
more fully in future papers. The left-hand side of the diagram emphasises the transmission of
shocks to the system through conventional channels of credit and market risk. On the righthand side, asset-pricing models can be used to facilitate inferences about banks’ balance
sheet positions and vulnerability to default from market price data (such as equity prices).
Given the limitations of balance sheet data and the difficulty of identifying new types of

4

A new approach to assessing risks to financial stability by Andrew Haldane, Simon Hall and Silvia Pezzini,
Bank of England Financial Stability Paper No 2 April 2007 for a fuller discussion.

5

Oesterreichische Nationalbank (2006), "Systemic Risk Monitor: A Model for Systemic Risk Analysis and
Stress Testing of Banking Systems", Financial Stability Report 11, by Michael Boss, Gerald Krenn, Claus
Puhr, Martin Summer.

BIS Review 81/2007

5

assets and off-balance sheet exposures, the asset price approach can serve as a useful
cross-check to the outputs of the more structural model.

12 The distinguishing feature of the model suite is the emphasis placed on the feedback
effects induced by market liquidity risk and funding liquidity risk and their interactions in a
network context. In addition, the potential feedback to the macro economy from the
behavioural responses of banks individually and collectively to an impairment of their balance
sheet position (eg, through a “financial accelerator” effect) will be incorporated explicitly. The
development of the suite is at an early stage but preliminary results from prototype work
seem to promise some useful insights. Chart E shows an illustrative distribution of future UK
bank system assets from the prototype model (the right-hand panel expands the lower tail of
the distribution). Notice that the distribution is explicitly bi-modal – as one might expect of a
system where losses on interbank exposures, and pressures on asset prices and market
liquidity from failing firms, may be transmitted through the financial network and may trigger a
cascade of defaults. Our suspicion is that the firesale of assets by institutions facing default
is the source of much of the action here, but more research is needed to be properly certain
and before we can ascribe quantitative meaning to the distribution.

6

BIS Review 81/2007

13 Chart F illustrates how such distributions might also be tracked over time and compared
in successive Financial Stability Reports. When operational, such distributions should help
guide judgements on how overall financial system vulnerability is changing. But the approach
should also provide considerable additional information on pressure points within the system
and on the channels of transmission and potential contagion.

14 I believe that this broad approach offers an important step forwards in the development of
an analytically and empirically robust framework for financial stability work. Of course it is
analytically hugely challenging – modelling non-linear tail events with endogenous strategic
interactions is always going to be tough! The results will inevitably be subject to major
uncertainty. But the approach does start to provide a consistent and coherent framework
which should substantially improve the value of top-down stress tests and of risk assessment
work.
15 A particular “operational” aim is to use the results to help improve the focus of risk
reduction work and crisis management planning, for example through the identification of

BIS Review 81/2007

7

“weak points” in the financial system and through improved assessment of the impact of
policy interventions. An important element of risk reduction work is to influence the behaviour
of financial firms. “Bottom-up” or firm-level stress-testing practices have developed rapidly in
recent years. But one challenge is that, as for the authorities, it is hard for individual firms to
gauge the likely “systemic impact” of particular shocks, which takes into account macro and
financial system interactions and feedback effects. Indeed, in practice, banks often model the
effect of even severe macroeconomic shocks as if they were occurring to the bank in
isolation. They thus may assume that they have freedom to readjust their balance sheets and
lending practices in the event of an adverse shock, without considering whether other banks
may be trying to do the same thing and the effect that these behavioural responses may
have cumulatively on market liquidity and on the economy as a whole. An important
implication is that many firm-level stress tests may consequently underestimate the possible
impact of adverse shocks. As I have highlighted, some of the potentially missing effects
should be captured in the proposed suite of models. But the proposed enhanced “top-down”
approach outlined above may still benefit from additional insights gained from closer dialogue
and interaction with major financial firms on their likely reaction to episodes of stress. I
consequently think there is merit in more formal comparison of “top-down” and “bottom-up”
stress testing exercises, and of seeking ways of integrating the two into more formal
“systemic” stress tests, where the authorities present an initial scenario to firms and then
modify the scenario in the light of feedback on the potential response by firms in an iterative
loop. This approach has recently been pioneered by the Dutch central bank. 6 It potentially
offers a useful way of improving knowledge of key system-wide interactions, and thus could
provide a valuable supplement both to improved “top-down” approaches and to “bottom-up”
stress tests which are naturally targeted more closely at the major risks facing individual
firms given their balance sheets and positions.
16 To conclude, there is a major programme of inherently difficult and challenging modelling
work ahead for the public authorities and for financial firms. But this is very important.
Development of a more coherent and consistent framework for the analysis of financial
stability is a major prize. Ultimately this should improve the understanding and pricing of risk
and support better targeting of public policy, focused more closely on containing systemic
risk and on the maintenance of the public good of systemic financial stability.

6

8

De Nederlandsche Bank (2006), Financial Stability: is the Dutch financial sector stress-resistant? Quarterly
Bulletin, December.

BIS Review 81/2007

John Gieve: Uncertainty, policy and financial markets
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Barbican Centre,
London, 24 July 2007.
*

*

*

Introduction
When I took on this job last year, interest rates had moved only twice in 24 months – once up
by 25bp and once back down again. Elsewhere we had seen, both in the US and the EU, two
years in which rates had been on a well signalled upwards path, while interest rates in Japan
remained anchored to zero. The “Great Stability” seemed to have reached its zenith of total
predictability.
However, one of the things that struck me from the outset in the MPC was that the
predictability outside was not matched by any complacency or self certainty inside. There
was a vigorous debate underway about the state of the economy and the policy response. At
that stage, some members of the committee doubted that the economy and employment
would recover from the slowdown in 2005 without a further reduction in rates, while others,
notably David Walton, saw emerging dangers on the other side.
The economy has strengthened since then and we have had to raise interest rates 5 times in
the last year. One thing that has not changed is the vigour of the internal debate. This is not
(only) because economists are famously argumentative. As someone once noted, economics
is the only field in which two people can get a Nobel prize for saying opposing things!
Instead, the level of debate reflects genuine and unavoidable uncertainty about the economy
which was disguised by the stability of rates but never went away. The fact is that we can
never be sure we have interpreted the past correctly – there are always alternative plausible
interpretations– and we know the future will contain surprises.
I want to start today by discussing that range of uncertainty. I will then look at three
uncertainties affecting financial markets at the moment: the losses in the US sub prime
market, the significance of influential investors including sovereign wealth funds, and the
state of the credit cycle.
The range of uncertainty
The last ten years have become known as the “Great Stability”. Certainly that has been true
for the UK. The last quarter was the 60th of uninterrupted positive growth and it was a touch
above the average for the last 10 years. On inflation too we saw this month another step
back towards target and in 10 years we have only seen one month when the CPI has been
more than 1 percentage point away from target (Chart 1).
For anyone, like me, who was in the Treasury through the late 70s and 80s, this looks like
the promised land; a degree of stability we did not think was attainable. Looking back we can
see that it was the pains and problems of those decades culminating in being forced out of
the ERM that produced a broad political consensus on a new approach to monetary policy
and the independence of the Bank. And my predecessors can take great credit for the
success of recent years. We have also been benefiting from benign world conditions with the
emergence of low cost producers in the Far East and strong world GDP growth, which has
been over 5 % in the last 3 years, the strongest 3-year period of growth since 1968-70, and
there is every reason to hope that this benign trend will continue.
However it is important not to exaggerate this stability or to forget the substantial
uncertainties that still exist. The last decade has seen some big and unanticipated changes.
Since 1999, oil prices have risen from below $20 a barrel to over $70 a barrel, the US Fed

BIS Review 84/2007

1

funds rate has varied between 1% and 6.5%, and the stock market has experienced its post
dotcom boom, bust and recovery, with the FTSE All Share falling from its 2000 high of over
3200 to below 1660 in 2003 before now recovering to over 3400. We have seen 9/11 and the
onset of a new form of international terrorism, the explosive growth of new financial
instruments and new players to exploit them, and we have seen the emergence of China and
India into major forces in the world economy.
But uncertainties arise not just because there will always be unexpected events, changes of
technology and taste. We also continually review and update our views on the underlying
relationships between countries, firms and people. And of course we are constantly learning
more about the past not least as the statistics get revised.
We try to emphasise those uncertainties by always publishing our forecasts in the form of fan
charts which show not just a central projection but a probability distribution around it.
If you go back a year to May 2006, our central projections for Q2 2007 were for growth of
about 3% and inflation of around 2%. But we also showed about a one in four chance that
growth would be a percentage point or more away and that inflation would be half a
percentage point from the central projections (Chart 2). It follows that there is also a range of
uncertainty around the right path for interest rates. The story of the last year has been that
growth has been stable (between 0.7 and 0.8% each quarter) and kept quite close to that
central projection but only on the basis of substantially higher interest rates than our
forecasts were based on; inflation has been higher than we projected again despite the
successive rises in rates.
You might expect this range of uncertainty to be reflected in a range of independent
forecasts, but you would be disappointed. Most forecasters operate models much like ours
and, of course, they use the same data. It is perhaps not a great surprise then that their
central projections tend to cluster in a remarkably narrow range. For example, take the
forecasters who were surveyed by Reuters prior to the July MPC meeting last year. At that
point there were only two out of 47 who expected interest rates to rise above 5% by now and
only one expected them to be below 4.25%. Fast forward to the most recent survey and you
will see that none of the 52 expect rates to go above 6% in the next year and only two expect
rates to go below 5.5%. To gauge the real range of uncertainty you need to look beyond the
central forecasts at the full probability distribution of possible outcomes. The fact that most
forecasters agree on the prospect does not mean it is likely to happen.
Central banks need to be particularly cautious in putting weight on market expectations and
outside forecasts because they are based at least in part on judgements about what we will
do. In my view it is sensible for independent forecasters to assume that we will do our job
and keep inflation low; but we can’t take comfort from the fact that most external forecasters
therefore expect inflation to return and stay around target – its our job to justify their faith and
keep their confidence. We must avoid chasing our own tail.
Of course, the uncertainty of the future and of the past is a factor in our decisions on interest
rates. When we are feeling our way in trying to assess the pressure of demand in the
economy, it can often be sensible to move rates gradually so that we can gather more
information as we go on the effect of past rises. But, of course, we all know that if we get
behind the curve, gradualism could compound the problems. The pace as well as the
direction of any change is therefore a matter for discussion in most MPC meetings.
Looking at the economy today there are as wide a range of uncertainties as ever, for
example about the level of slack in the labour market, the pricing pressures in companies,
the future path of oil prices and the strength of monetary growth. I want to discuss three
which arise from developments in financial markets, and which are relevant to both the
Bank’s core purposes: monetary stability and financial stability.

2

BIS Review 84/2007

Sub prime and the credit markets
Let’s start with the credit markets. The backwash from defaults in the US sub prime market
has been seen not just in the recent problems faced by some hedge funds 1 exposed to this
sector but in credit markets more widely. Credit spreads have widened especially for riskier
bonds (Chart 3), the covenant lite loans on offer a few weeks ago are off the table, and the
leveraged loans in the warehouses are reported to be moving more slowly. And this has
happened at a time when long term interest rates have been rising.
We have seen shocks to credit markets in the last two summers which were swiftly reversed.
Could recent events be the beginning of a more lasting change?
There are some good reasons for doubting it. First the underlying economic and corporate
fundamentals remain encouraging. Not only is world growth running at over 5% but it seems
better balanced with the recovery of Germany and Japan and slightly lower growth in the US
(although one of the explanations for the rise in longer term risk free rates has been a more
optimistic view on US growth prospects). In the corporate sector overall gearing is not
unusual, pension deficits have diminished, and profitability is high. Defaults in the prime
housing market in the US have not shown dramatic increases. Losses on mortgage lending
in the UK are still very low and there seems no prospect of a significant rise in unemployment
that led to sharp rises in repossessions and defaults in the past. Equity markets remain
strong at multiples of earnings which are little above average. Again, within financial markets,
liquidity remains high overall (Chart 4).
Against that background, there is a risk of becoming alarmed by good news. In our last
Financial Stability Report we identified the low risk premia in credit markets as the principal
vulnerability in financial markets because of the risk it carried of a swift and disorderly return
to more normal levels. The rise since then has not been large in a longer context (Chart 5)
but in itself it is a healthy correction. At the same time we have seen a fall in the dollar over
recent months which should tend to reduce the risk of a sudden correction of global
imbalances, another of the key vulnerabilities we have been monitoring in recent years.
But the story of the sub prime market is not yet over and it certainly does point to some
vulnerabilities in modern financial markets which need to be factored into financial firms’ risk
management.
First, this was a layered market in which many originators had an incentive to maximise
volumes, where the loans were then securitised and the securities were in turn combined into
CDOs for onward distribution.
One risk in such markets is that there is a loss of information along the chain and that
incentives become misaligned; in particular the quality of credit monitoring and credit
assessment declines. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that occurred in 2006 in the sub
prime markets. Chart 6 shows the arrears on successive tranches of loans and shows that
the quality declined over time particularly in 2005 and 2006.
Second, the new derivatives markets change the way in which credit losses hit balance
sheets. In the world of on-balance-sheet lending, when defaults begin to turn up, there can
be scope for rescheduling and for discussing with your accountants what provisions are
prudent. We saw that impact on a few of the big banks earlier this year. In the securitised
markets, the pace can look slower to begin with but then comes in a rush. Chart 7 shows the
spreads on different tranches of the ABX index, the main benchmark index for sub prime
securities. What is remarkable here first is how slow the spreads were to move at all. Of
course, the predicted losses on particular tranches do no move smoothly with rising defaults,
but throughout 2006 the economic press was a buzz with worry about the US housing

1

In particular, the High-grade Structured Credit Enhanced Leverage Fund and the Higfh-grade Structured
Credit Fund both managed by Bear Stearns Asset Management (BSAM).

BIS Review 84/2007

3

market; sentiment changed several times on whether the housing downturn would lead to a
general recession. Throughout this period the originators continued to write new sub prime
loans and the prices of the ABX scarcely quivered.
But since January the story has been quite different with two dramatic hikes in the spreads
first of BBB and then of the A-rated index. In total, the spread for BBB has gone from 500
basis points at the turn of the year to over 3000 basis points. Each of these steps has left
casualties. Many of the originators were forced into bankruptcy at the start of the year and in
the last few weeks we have seen Bear Stearns’ announcement that two of its funds have lost
all or nearly all of their investors’ money. I suspect the speed and scale of the changes were
outside most stress test simulations. And while the most dramatic changes may have
happened there will now be a long period as the implications work through the ratings of
other derivatives and the full range of instruments are marked to market.
A related lesson is about liquidity in new markets. The worry has been that at times of stress,
liquidity would dry up and it would be impossible to trade out of positions. That would not just
lock firms into losses but would disrupt strategies which require continuous dynamic hedging
– for example, strategies such as constant proportion portfolio insurance (CPPI). Again that
has been a feature of recent weeks. It has been widely reported that a couple of the lenders
to the BSAM funds put their collateral on the market but were not able to sell as much as
they wanted.
That is connected to the fourth lesson, the vulnerability of valuations in sophisticated
derivatives. These are not widely traded so valuations are usually based not on market
prices but on models which draw in turn on correlations established over the recent past.
This is a fundamental and unavoidable feature of new products and markets. There simply
has not been a full cycle’s experience to draw on.
When we published our Financial Stability Report in April we drew attention to the sub prime
history as a warning of what could go wrong in bigger and more central credit markets.
Developments since then underline that message. If some of the price moves in the sub
prime CDOs have spread to CLOs based on leveraged loans and buy-outs, that is hardly a
surprise given recent growth in that market (Chart 8).
There are signs that the speed with which the pipeline of leveraged deals is being
warehoused has slowed down at least temporarily and the terms of some of the lending has
tightened a little. But that said there are some significant differences between the sub prime
and corporate loan markets. First corporate profits remain robust and there has not been the
step up in defaults that ushered in the sub prime crisis. Second while the total size of the
corporate bond market dwarfs the sub prime mortgages market that is not true of the
leveraged corporate loan market (Chart 9).
The weight of money – pension funds and sovereign wealth funds
A second development in financial markets in the news at present is the growth of sovereign
investors and of “Sovereign Wealth Funds” in particular. While these have long been
established in Singapore, Norway and the Middle East, the decision of China with its huge
foreign exchange reserves to diversify its investments is new. The question is what effect, if
any, the growth of influential investors like these is having and may have in future on relative
prices in financial markets.
Economists tend to assume that asset markets are efficient so that any deviation from
fundamental value represents a profit opportunity that will be quickly eliminated through the
actions of rational traders who are constantly on the lookout for such opportunities.
Underpriced assets are bought while overpriced assets are sold short, thereby bringing
prices back in line with their fundamental value. In this way, investment flows and trading
activity should not impact prices, unless they reflect information about the fundamentals. In
practice the position can be more complicated.

4

BIS Review 84/2007

In the UK, demand for long-term gilts from pension funds is widely thought to have had a
significant impact especially on indexed gilt prices. Trustees have become more concerned
in recent years to reduce the volatility of funds’ valuations, since changes now appear on the
sponsoring companies’ balance sheets. There has been a wide move towards Liability
Driven Investment (LDI) and to matching their long term liabilities either by buying more
index-linked bonds or by buying equivalent hedges in the derivative markets. The narrowing
of pension fund deficits as equity markets have improved may have strengthened the trend
since funds may now want to “lock in” the improved position. Even a relatively small shift in
pension funds’ strategies would represent a large increase in demand relative to the size of
the inflation-linked bond market. During 2005 and 2006, anecdotal evidence suggested that
UK pension demand for gilts (and associated hedging by dealers) was a contributory factor in
driving long-horizon sterling nominal and real interest rates lower. Indeed, this may have
been one reason why UK long-term real interest rates fell by more over this period than
overseas rates.
Assessing the impact on gilts prices is important for the Bank because we commonly use the
differences between indexed and conventional gilts to estimate longer term market inflation
expectations. And these calculations have shown an increase in forward inflation breakevens
especially in the last few months as nominal long term rates have increased (Chart 10). If
that reflects a genuine increase in investors’ expectations of future inflation in the long term
that would imply a loss of credibility in the UK regime.
However, there are few signs from surveys and market intelligence that UK long-run inflation
expectations have picked up. Market contacts cite the sheer weight of institutional demand in
the relatively illiquid index-linked gilt market as a more likely explanation why the price of
long-dated index-linked gilts has not fallen by as much as conventional bonds over recent
months.
The comparisons are complicated by the fact that the measure of inflation that is used to
index gilts is the RPI while our target is set for the CPI and the gap, which largely reflects the
impact of interest rates and house prices on the RPI is significant, is about 0.7% on average
and variable (Chart 11). But even making an adjustment for that, the rise in inflation
breakevens is significant.
Of course, if inflation at long horizons is not generally expected to increase as the forward
rates at face value might indicate, why don’t some other investors with different risk appetites
sell short the overpriced index-linked bond? One answer may be that there are significant
market frictions. For example, trading long-horizon forward inflation requires an investment
period of many years, over which market volatility must be endured, and most speculative
players have significantly shorter investment horizons. Second, transaction costs (bid-offer)
are typically higher in index-linked than conventional instruments, partly because the risks in
holding inventory are not predictable and are not easily hedged. 2
It may be that, against the background of more volatile realised inflation over the past year
the rise in breakeven inflation rates reflects an increase in inflation risk premia, the
compensation required to bear unexpected changes in future inflation. And the marginal
buyers of index-linked bonds (typically insurance companies and pension funds) have
become more willing to pay a premium for these assets because they better match their
liabilities. Rather like entering into an insurance contract, these investors may be willing to
pay a higher price for index-linked securities because the payoffs may be received in states
of the world when they are most valued. Such institutional factors probably account for some

2

Partly because of the strength of this institutional demand (and their tendency to buy bonds then hold them to
maturity), inflation-linked markets are significantly less liquid than their nominal counterparts. DMO data show
that as a proportion of the market capitalisation of bonds outstanding, turnover in the IG market is about 1/6th
that of the conventional gilt market.

BIS Review 84/2007

5

part of the measured rise in forward inflation rates. Nonetheless the stability of inflation
expectations will remain a key concern for the MPC.
Sovereign Investors
In a global context, another influential set of investors in financial markets over recent years
have been holders of official foreign exchange reserves and Sovereign Wealth Funds
(SWFs). A by-product of large current account surpluses, the funds available for investment
have ballooned over the past few years – foreign assets held by sovereigns globally currently
stand at US$7-8 trillion, of which around US$5 ½ trillion is held as international reserves.
This is around 5 times higher than the level seen in the early 1990s, and could well be an
understatement. The growth in foreign assets has been particularly rapid in Asian countries
(especially China) and oil and gas exporting economies, including Russia (Chart 12).
It is difficult to be precise about the size of SWFs because they are not recorded explicitly in
most official statistics. But recent estimates suggest that their foreign assets are in the range
of $2 –2 ½ trillion and they are rising rapidly.
There is no consensus on the effects that this recycling of foreign exchange reserves is
having on global financial markets. The market for US Treasuries is exceptionally deep and
liquid, but with foreign official investors 3 accounting in aggregate for around 30% of the total
US Treasury debt market, some academic studies suggest that they may have kept the
nominal yield on the 10-year US Treasury a hundred basis points lower than they would have
been otherwise. 4
The perception that official buyers may well have different aims and risk appetites to other
commercial investors could give them more influence in the markets. And, as with UK
pension funds, they may genuinely alter the risk and term premia in some markets.
Within these accumulating reserves, the growth of SWFs will alter, at least at the margin, the
asset mix of official balance sheets. Over time that will tend to increase the price of riskier
assets, like equities and corporate and emerging market bonds, compared to government
bonds. The impact will be greater if there are concentrations of investment in particular asset
classes or countries. More widely, the switch of reserve rich countries from lenders to owners
of financial or real assets is also likely to lead to political tensions and pressures for
protectionism.
The credit cycle and monetary policy
The knock on effects of defaults in the US sub prime market and the impact of big investors
on asset prices are factors we need to assess not just in trying to understand the financial
sector and the stresses it faces but in gauging the state of the economy more widely.
The story of the sub prime market illustrates a wider point. In traditional banking markets in
the past there has been an observable tendency for banks to overshoot both in offering credit
at the top of the cycle and retrenching afterwards. That feeds through into asset prices and
can have an impact on the wider economy. Despite the sophistication of the new capital
markets, a very traditional cycle seems to have been alive and kicking in sub prime.

3

The definition of the official sector in the US Treasury survey also includes public bodies such as oil
stabilisation funds.

4

See ‘International capital flows and US interest rates’, NBER working paper 12560, October 2006.

6

BIS Review 84/2007

A similar story could be told about the credit card and other unsecured lending over the last
few years. The growth rate rose in the late 90s until defaults began to build up over the last 2
years and the banks and other lenders tightened up terms and conditions sharply (Chart 13).
The path of commercial property prices in recent years suggests the same has been
happening there (Chart 14).
In both cases there were genuine and lasting changes in technology and the costs of supply
as the development of IT improved credit scoring and allowed the distribution of securitised
risk to a wider range of investors. However, there are clear signs, at least in unsecured credit
for households, that the lenders overshot. It seems likely that something similar has been
going on in some leveraged loan deals. The position in the biggest markets – the mortgage
market and mainstream corporate lending – are less clear.
How far recent growth rates in money supply and in asset prices reflect a credit supply cycle
and, if so, where we are in the cycle are questions we have been discussing on the MPC. If
we could be confident of the answers there would be a strong case for using monetary policy
to help stabilise growth and inflation by “leaning into the wind” – that is, raising rates a little
faster or further than we would otherwise have done on the upswing and reducing them
quicker on the down swing. In practice the diagnosis is rarely clear cut. The sub prime losses
and the impact of large investors are two factors complicating matters at the moment.
Conclusion
The old Chinese curse – “may he live in interesting times” – might be designed for central
bankers. Our job is to keep things stable and boring. But there are limits in a rapidly changing
world to what is possible. My argument is that the uncertainties today are a return to
normality after two years of exceptional predictability in monetary policy both in the UK and
elsewhere.
A particular area of uncertainty at present is in the credit markets. The dangers of combining
a traditional credit cycle with the new derivatives markets have emerged in the US sub prime
sector. The US housing market is in its downswing and there are some signs that the same
is true in the UK of unsecured credit and commercial property. The position of the bigger UK
sectors is less clear cut. The shift in pension fund priorities and the growth of sovereign
wealth funds are further clouding the picture.
It is our job on the MPC to work through these issues and reach a judgement on them. Our
target is to reduce inflation to 2% and keep it there. I can assure you that we will do whatever
is needed to achieve that.

Chart 1: Volatility of GDP and CPI
Real GDP Growth

Per cent
5

CPI
4

3

2

1

0
79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05

BIS Review 84/2007

7

Chart 2: GDP and CPI fan charts from
May 2006 Inflation Report

Chart 3: Corporate bond spreads
Basis points
80

Basis points
350

High Yield corporations (RHS)

70

300

60

250

50

200

40
150

30
Emerging markets (RHS)
20
10

100

Investment Grade
corportations (LHS)

50

0

0
Jan

2006

Apr

Jul

Oct

Jan

Apr

Jul

2007

Chart 4: Financial market liquidity

8

BIS Review 84/2007

Chart 5: Corporate bond spreads
Basis points
180
High Yield corporations (RHS)
160
140

Basis points
900
800
700

Emerging markets (RHS)

120

600

100

500

80

400

60

300

40

200

Investment Grade
corportations (LHS)

20

100
0

0
00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Chart 6: US sub-prime arrears
Per cent

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

0

5

10

15 20 25 30
Age in months

35

40

45

50

Chart 7: Spreads on ABX index
Basis point s
3500
3000
2500
BBB-

2000
1500

BBB
1000
A

500
0

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul
2006

BIS Review 84/2007

07

9

Chart 8: Real LBO loan issuance
United Kingdom
United States
Rest of Western Europe
Rest of world

US$ billions, 2006 prices
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

86 88

90

92

94 96

98

00

06 (b)

02 04

Chart 9: Corporate bond, leveraged
loans and sub-prime markets
$bn
US and European leveraged loan markets
US sub-prime
European sub investment-grade bond
US sub investment-grade bond
European investment-grade bond
US investment-grade bond

12000

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Chart 10: Breakeven inflation forward
rates
%
June MP C

4
3.75
3.5

20 year
10 year

3.25
3
5 year

2.75
2.5

May-06

10

Jul-06

Oct-06

Jan-07

Apr-07

BIS Review 84/2007

Chart 11: Inflation gaps
Percentage changes on a year earlier
2.5
RPI-CPI
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
RPIX-CPI
0.0
-0.5
00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Chart 12: Official exchange reserves
Ot her (Indonesia, Malaysia, P hilippines, T hailand)US$ bn
India
3500
Singapore
Hong Kong
3000
Korea
T aiwan
2500
Japan
China
OP EC, Rus, Kaz
2000
1500
1000
500

Dec00

Dec01

Dec02

Dec03

Dec04

Dec05

Dec06

Mar07

Chart 13: Lending to individuals
% change oya

20
Unsecure d (16%)

18
16
14
12
10

Total

8
6
4
2

1994

BIS Review 84/2007

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

11

Chart 14: Commercial property capital
values growth
30

Percentage change on
previous year

25
20
15
10
5+
0
5

-

10
15
20
80

12

83

86

89

92

95

98

01

04

07

BIS Review 84/2007

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Northern Ireland
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Belfast, 9 October 2007.
*

*

*

Three weeks ago, thousands of depositors queued on the streets outside branches of
Northern Rock to take their money out. Those scenes, broadcast around the world, were
shocking. How did they come about and how can we prevent them in future?
My focus tonight will be on why the incentives facing banks, investors, and depositors led
them to behave as they did. Most of what happened can be understood in terms of those
incentives. And, if we are to create a structure for our banking system so that such scenes
are not repeated, we must ensure that the temporary measures put in place in recent weeks
evolve into permanent reforms in the coming months.
But I want to start with the story of how these events came about. It begins in the
international capital markets. One of the most remarkable changes in the world economy
over the past decade has been the fall in interest rates. Some of that stems from the fall in
inflation as central banks have regained control after the Great Inflation of the 1970s and
1980s. But even adjusting for inflation, low-risk borrowers have been able to borrow on world
capital markets at very low rates. In the UK, the yields on 10-year inflation-protected
government bonds have, in the past year, been close to 1%. At the turn of the millennium,
they were 2%. Back in 1990, they were 4%.
Why have these real interest rates fallen so much? The primary explanation is the high rates
of saving in other parts of the world. Japan has been a net saver for more than a quarter of a
century. Following the Asian crisis in the mid-1990s, many of Japan’s neighbours also raised
their national saving rates. That group includes the country which is now the world’s biggest
saver – China. And more recently, after the tripling of oil prices, they have all been joined by
the oil-producing nations from Saudi Arabia to Norway.
The savings of these countries, evident in their trade surpluses, have flooded into world
capital markets. Faced with what Ben Bernanke has called a “glut” of savings, borrowers in
the rest of the world have been able to attract long-term loans at remarkably low interest
rates. Those rates of interest have, in the developed world, encouraged borrowing and
spending, and reduced saving. From the United States to Australia, and also here at home,
we have increasingly spent more than we earn, resulting in large and expanding trade
deficits. Our own trade deficit is more than 3% of GDP, but that is dwarfed by the United
States, with a trade deficit of more than 6% of GDP.
The response of central banks in the developed world to these changes was predictable. To
keep overall demand growing – and inflation stable – in the face of trade deficits, they
needed to keep short-term interest rates low and domestic spending strong. In the United
Kingdom, Bank Rate has averaged just 4 ½% in the past 5 years. In 2003, it was as low as 3
½%. But even then, the UK had the highest interest rate in the G7. In the United States, the
Federal Reserve cut its interest rate to just 1%, and in Japan, experiencing deflation, interest
rates were just 0.1%.
Those developments were inevitable if the world economy was to continue to grow. But the
price was unusually low interest rates – both short and long-term – which were considerably
below the levels to which most investors had become accustomed in their working lives.
Dissatisfaction with these rates gave birth to the “search for yield”. This desire for higher
yields could not be met by traditional investment opportunities. So it led to a demand for
innovative, and inevitably riskier, financial instruments and for greater leverage. And the
financial sector responded to the challenge by providing ever more sophisticated ways of
increasing yields by taking more risk. But some of those new instruments were so opaque

BIS Review 114/2007

1

and complex that investors lost sight of the risks involved. Until, that is, they were brought
down to earth with a bump on August 9.
Occasional tremors in financial markets had been evident over the past year or so, and again
in July this year. It was impossible to tell whether they constituted a gradual release of
pressure on risk premia that had become overly compressed, or whether they signalled a
more disruptive movement to come. On August 9 the question was answered.
As if to highlight the global nature of the crisis, the unexpected revelation by a French bank
that its investment funds could no longer value their exposures to US sub-prime mortgage
loans produced a sharp reappraisal of the risks they were taking by investors around the
globe. The returns demanded by investors on all risky assets rose – from packages of bank
loans to plain vanilla company shares – so the prices of those assets fell. And in some
markets for complex financial instruments, investors realised that perhaps they did not
understand as much about the nature of the risks involved as they should. So not only did
asset prices fall, but the markets in some of these instruments virtually closed. There were
no buyers.
This freezing of capital markets led to a chill in banking systems around the developed world.
Banks that had relied on selling packages of loans in securitised form found that they
couldn’t sell them. Investment vehicles that held securitised loans have found it difficult to
finance their holdings by borrowing. Faced with the possibility that they would have to finance
these vehicles themselves, banks with spare cash have hoarded it and have become
reluctant to lend to other banks beyond very short maturities. That has been evident in the
spreads between interbank lending rates and central bank interest rates in the UK and
equally in the euro area and United States. The bottom line is that banks that had financed
themselves by borrowing from their peers, or by securitising and selling their loan assets,
found that their funding dried up. In the United Kingdom, Northern Rock was particularly
exposed. It was able to borrow only at shorter and shorter maturities.
The present financial crisis is of a most unusual nature in that it comes against a background
of five years of strong growth of the world economy and a decade and more of remarkable
economic stability at home. Moreover, most banking and financial crises in the past – from
the failure of Overend and Gurney in 1866, to the collapse of BCCI in more recent times –
were associated with bad loans and significant losses on assets. The remarkable fact about
this crisis has been the relatively small size of the bad loans compared with the total assets
of banks. The crisis has arisen instead from the way banks have managed their liabilities.
What did the Bank of England – as the central bank – do for the banking system?
First, we did our routine work in the money markets of lending to the banking system against
high quality collateral, such as government debt, and at Bank Rate set each month by the
Monetary Policy Committee. After some initial volatility, we achieved our primary objective in
the money markets of bringing interest rates on overnight borrowing into line with Bank Rate.
And over the past two months as a whole, overnight interest rates have, on average, been as
close to Bank Rate in the UK as in the euro area and closer than in the US.
We were, however, pressed to do more than our routine job and to lend in exchange for
other collateral, including the financial assets for which the markets had virtually closed.
Banks, in particular, said they wanted us to help them turn illiquid assets into cash.
As I told the House of Commons Treasury Committee on 20 September, we were cautious
about doing this. The case for caution is, in the jargon, moral hazard. Put simply, such action
by us encourages the very risk-taking that caused the present problems. It is crucial that, in
making their lending and borrowing decisions, banks face the right incentives. That is why we
did offer to lend in exchange for illiquid assets but only at a penalty rate of interest.
Support on the scale required by Northern Rock would have been difficult to undertake
without it becoming “stigmatised” – regardless of the method adopted. The only way to avoid
that would have been to offer to lend to all banks at a rate that many others – in addition to

2

BIS Review 114/2007

Northern Rock – found attractive to pay. And to do that without drawing attention to Northern
Rock’s take-up would have required a truly massive injection of cash into the banking
system. That could happen only if there were no penalty rate or if conditions in money
markets generally were difficult enough to make the penalty rate attractive to many banks
over a prolonged period.
Nothing would have been easier than for the Bank of England to lend freely without a penalty
rate. Almost every actor in this drama saw advantage in cheap money and plenty of it. The
role of the central bank is to ensure that the appropriate incentives are in place to discourage
excessive risk-taking and the under-pricing of risk, and in so doing to avoid sowing the seeds
of an even greater crisis in future. That we have done in each action we have taken – by
maintaining the principle of the penalty rate.
Some commentators have taken issue with these concerns about moral hazard, arguing, by
analogy, that fire departments put out fires started by people who smoke in bed. I agree that
we have fire services to do precisely that. And if a fire starts in the financial system, the
central bank will put it out if it threatens to spread. But fire services do not offer free
insurance for people who smoke in bed or set fire to their own house, thereby encouraging
them to take risks that endanger others.
When it became clear that Northern Rock could not find funding elsewhere, it came to the
tripartite authorities (FSA, Treasury and Bank) to seek financial support from the Bank of
England. Rather than stabilise the situation, the actions of the authorities seemed, at least
initially, to fan the flames. There are lessons for us to learn. And I will come to those in a
minute. But let me return to the queues of depositors. Here is an extract from a local
newspaper:
“By noon on Friday, more than 40 … customers … were waiting in line at
the branch … waiting upward of an hour and a half to withdraw money from
their accounts.”
“Anxious depositors clutching withdrawal slips filled the offices for a second
straight day. … The company placed extra chairs in a waiting area and
asked customers to write their names on a sign-in sheet.”
This wasn’t Newcastle or London. It was Los Angeles on August 17 and 18. The bank
experiencing the run was not Northern Rock but Countrywide, a US mortgage bank. It is a
Tale of Two Banks – banks of similar sizes and facing similar difficulties with funding – just a
few weeks apart. Like Northern Rock, Countrywide took risks and relied on short-term
funding from investors. But the similarity ends there. There were two significant differences.
First, Countrywide had paid millions of dollars each year to big banks as a liquidity insurance
policy so that, in the event of difficulty, they would provide it with long-term loans. So on
August 17 Countrywide was able to claim on that insurance and draw down $11.5bn of
committed credit lines. Northern Rock had not taken out anything like that level of liquidity
insurance. So when it came to the Bank of England for support, it was important that liquidity
was not provided free.
Second, even though Countrywide had insurance, its depositors were still worried. On
hearing that it had claimed on its insurance, queues formed. But those queues were short
and soon dissipated. The depositors simply did not face the same incentives to withdraw
their money. The United States has a well-developed insurance scheme for depositors. If a
bank is forced into administration, there are mechanisms in place to repay depositors in full,
up to $100,000 per account. And most importantly, the depositors are paid within just a few
days. Without such a scheme in the UK, once the queues started to form at Northern Rock,
other depositors faced every incentive to join them. The only way to stop the run was for the
Chancellor to announce a government guarantee of the deposits of Northern Rock, which
today was extended to new depositors as part of the continuing stabilisation plan for the
business.

BIS Review 114/2007

3

So what are the main lessons for us from the recent episode? Time will provide an
opportunity for deeper reflection, and it is important that careful thought does come before
action. But I would identify three lessons.
First, liquidity should be central to the regulation of banks. Regulation worldwide has paid
insufficient attention to liquidity, focussing instead on capital. Northern Rock did not face a
problem of inadequate capital. But it was vulnerable to a shock that reduced the liquidity in
markets for securitised mortgages. Banks need to face the right incentives to manage their
funding positions. Smaller banks with reliance on wholesale funding should be encouraged to
put in place insurance. We should not, however, expect regulation alone to solve this
problem. That is why I think it is so important to create the right incentives.
Second, the single largest impediment to dealing with Northern Rock was the absence of a
mechanism for intervening pre-emptively in a bank in trouble to separate the retail deposit
book – the insured deposits – from the rest of the bank’s balance sheet. The ability to do this
is central to the way the US and other systems operate, where the authorities are obliged to
step in early – “prompt corrective action” – to protect depositors. One tool at their disposal,
currently unavailable in the UK, is a special insolvency law for banks. Legislation to create
the powers to deal with a bank in this way seems to me the single most important necessary
reform. Deposit insurance is another area that requires change. To pretend that retail
depositors can be treated in the same way as unsecured creditors in a business as complex
and opaque as some of today’s banks is wholly unrealistic. The upper limit on deposits that
qualify for 100% insurance has sensibly been raised, and the Government has made clear
that a longer term reform of deposit insurance is also under review.
Third, central banks operate as lenders of last resort. We need to be able to lend against
good, albeit illiquid, collateral, and at a penalty rate, without destabilising further any bank to
which we lend. Reform of deposit insurance will go a long way to achieving this. But in an
age of instant communications, where the news of a facility for Northern Rock was leaked
even before it was officially announced, it may be difficult to adopt the quiet methods used by
central banks in the past. We will, however, explore ways to restore the use of discretion in
central bank operations.
Finally, it is worth remembering that, unlike the cases of BCCI and Barings a decade or more
ago, or the problems with pensions and life insurance more recently, not a single depositor
has lost a penny. I hope, however, that the three lessons I have identified will be
incorporated in future legislation.
It is equally important that the Bank is not distracted from the job of setting interest rates to
meet the 2% target for CPI inflation. In March this year, inflation rose to 3.1% and I wrote an
open letter to the then Chancellor explaining why and what we were doing about it. Over the
past 12 months, we have raised Bank Rate by one percentage point. And, notwithstanding
some claims at the time of the open letter, inflation has since fallen back quite sharply,
mainly as retail gas and electricity prices have stopped rising and, more recently, fallen. CPI
inflation was, in August, a fraction below the 2% target. The challenge now for the Monetary
Policy Committee is to keep it there.
The current turmoil in financial markets is not over. Conditions have eased a little – share
prices have recovered and interbank interest rates have fallen back. Indeed, spreads
between interbank rates and anticipated central bank interest rates are now lower in the UK
than in the euro area or United States. But for the moment, some markets remain virtually
closed. And even as they re-open, there will not be a return, I hope, to the excessive risktaking – and associated rapid expansion of credit – of the past few years. With investors
more wary of risks, banks will find it harder to raise funds. So credit will not be so readily or
cheaply available to businesses and households.
As we said in August, pressures on capacity mean that output growth needs to slow
moderately over the next year or so if we are to continue to meet the inflation target. We will
be monitoring closely the impact of tighter credit conditions on demand and output over the

4

BIS Review 114/2007

coming months. Even though inflation is close to the target and pay pressures are muted, we
will continue to look ahead and monitor the risks to inflation that we identified in August: the
signs from surveys and financial markets that people expect inflation to pick up; the strength
of company pricing intentions, and the recent increases in world commodity prices.
Keeping inflation close to the 2% target is the biggest contribution the Bank of England can
make to economic stability generally. Changes in Bank Rate could not prevent the profound
change in the world economy that pushed down yields on low-risk financial assets and led
investors to take on more risk. They cannot now prevent the re-pricing of that risk. And just
as Bank Rate was not set to insulate the manufacturing sector from the trade deficit that
resulted from the earlier change in the world economy, it will not be set now to insulate the
banking system from the re-pricing of risk. But you can be sure that we will do whatever is
necessary to keep inflation close to the 2% target.
Tonight is the first time that the Court of the Bank of England, and the Monetary Policy
Committee, have gathered in Northern Ireland. So much has changed in the Province since
the troubles started and I first came to Belfast to speak at Queen’s University. Given that we
are the Bank of England, it would be understandable if many in Northern Ireland were
suspicious of our role. But I can assure you that we are most definitely the central bank of the
whole of the United Kingdom, including Northern Ireland. We pay great attention to events
here, and, along with other members of the Monetary Policy Committee, I visit regularly. We
have a full time Agency with a team who live and work in Northern Ireland and report back
every month on what is happening in the local economy.
At this momentous time in the history of Northern Ireland, I can assure you that the Bank will
continue to place great importance on its presence here. During my visits, I have discovered
some extraordinarily successful companies, many set up during the troubles. As you
continue to build the political success and economic prosperity of the new Northern Ireland,
the Bank of England will support you wholeheartedly through our efforts to provide a platform
of economic stability.

BIS Review 114/2007

5

Nigel Jenkinson: New markets and new demands – challenges for central
banks in the wholesale market infrastructure
Speech by Mr Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at a
joint Bank of England/European Central Bank Conference on “Payments and Monetary and
Financial Stability”, Frankfurt am Main, 12 November 2007.
I am very grateful to Mark Manning for his help in preparing this speech and to John Gieve, Victoria Cleland and
Ben Norman for helpful comments.

*
1.

*

*

Introduction

1
Central banks sit at the heart of the monetary economy providing the ultimate
settlement asset and typically operating the large-value payment systems that underpin
financial activity. The modern central bank’s twin objectives of monetary and financial
stability emerged from their early role in settling claims between banks.
2
But this traditional payments function is subject to the same forces for change that are
transforming the rest of the economy. In particular, developments in technology, the financial
innovation they allow, and the globalisation of finance are reshaping the landscape, exposing
new sources of risk and posing fresh challenges for regulators and central banks.
3
As markets become more interconnected and international, national authorities have to
work more closely together, cooperating in their oversight and operational activities and
coordinating their risk assessments. As new products and players emerge in the commercial
sector, they may also need to adapt the scope of their oversight and regulatory response.
4
I would like to take some time this afternoon to explore some of these issues, many of
which will resurface over the course of this two-day conference.
2.

Early demands: the historical context

5
First some history. How did central banks come to assume their “central” role in the
financial infrastructure?
6
Internationally, Venice claims a key role in the story, but I will start later with the
activities of goldsmiths in 17th century London. Starting from their custody business,
goldsmiths began to settle transactions between merchants, across their books or via the
transfer of deposit receipts – the early bank notes. Merchants were thereby able to settle
obligations with one another without having to carry, count out and value coins: a welcome
development, considering that a £100 sterling bag of silver coins – a commonly used value
for notes – weighed over 30 pounds (14kg for those in the audience baffled by imperial
measures)!
7
Over time, so as to accommodate transfers between customers of different “banks”, the
banks started accepting claims on each other and, once they found ways to settle these
claims, established the first British interbank payment systems.
8
So what were these early settlement mechanisms? At first, banks started settling
interbank claims using gold and silver coins. But these were in short supply and, again,
costly to transport and exchange.
9
Banks thus eventually innovated by switching to settlement in assets convertible into
gold and silver. For example, by the 1770s, London bankers had begun to settle in notes
issued by the Bank of England, a highly-regarded, but at that time, private bank.

BIS Review 130/2007

1

10 A low-risk settlement asset was particularly important in the unregulated world of the
goldsmiths, in which credit risk was acute and liquidity shocks – like the one we have
experienced of late − were common and dangerous. In a sorry letter to an associate 1 , one
goldsmith wrote to another in the 1660s: “I have beene by many accidents much
postpon’d…ye money due to mee is soe farre off that I can not make it useful to mee. All
Credit in London is much Shortened of late.”
11 Showing all the optimism which continues to characterise bankers today, he added: “ I
am attempting a way to enlarge my owne (credit) and doubt not to effect it to his
Maties.[Majesties] advantage as well as my owne, if I am (like ye lame dogg) but helpt over
this style.”
12 Further efficiency gains were then obtained by settling interbank obligations over the
accounts of a single institution. This innovation was sometimes put in place by the public
authorities; in other cases it developed naturally, such as when the London bankers adopted
Bank of England deposits as the ultimate settlement asset in 1854.
3.

Payments and monetary and financial stability

13 To ensure that its liabilities continue to be perceived of higher quality than those of any
other issuer, the institution at the apex of the payment system – typically the central bank –
has an incentive to exercise close control over the terms on which they are made available to
the banking system.
14 That translates into the traditional monetary stability objective: preservation of the role
of the ultimate settlement asset as a store of value and unit of account. It also gives the
central bank a strong interest in the stability of the financial system. And within that a reliable
and resilient infrastructure for distributing the ultimate settlement asset is a key condition of
stability (and of implementing monetary policy effectively).
15 In an advanced monetary economy, of course, bank deposits constitute by far the
largest component of “money”; in the UK they make up some 96% of the broad monetary
aggregate, M4. Agents rely on interbank payment systems to facilitate the direct transfer of
deposits between banks and thereby also preserve their role as a medium of exchange. And
as the sophistication of securities and other markets has grown, the core payment systems
have become intertwined with the settlement and clearing systems for the key markets.
Together they have become a critical part of the infrastructure not just for the financial
system but for the economy more widely. And in the wake of 9/11, all central banks have
been giving more attention to the physical and financial resilience of these systems. For
example, in our regular Financial Stability Report, the Bank of England has included the risk
of infrastructure disruption in the list of the top six vulnerabilities facing the financial system
over the last two years.
16 As Alan Greenspan notes in his memoirs: “We’d always thought that if you wanted to
cripple the US economy, you’d take out the payment systems. Banks would be forced to fall
back on inefficient physical transfers of money. Businesses would resort to barter and IOUs;
the level of economic activity across the country could drop like a rock.”
17 In a paper to be presented at this conference tomorrow, Andrea Gerali and Franco
Passacantando consider this in the context of the Great Depression. As confidence in the
banking system evaporated, bank deposits ceased to function as a medium of exchange.
“Scrip”, or substitute money, emerged, typically taking the form of vouchers or coupon books.
Such monies had otherwise only been commonly used in isolated lumber or coal-mining

1

2

Quoted in Quinn (1997), “Goldsmith-Banking: Mutual Acceptance and Interbanker Clearing in Restoration
London”, Explorations in Economic History 34, pp411-432.

BIS Review 130/2007

communities in the United States – communities lacking banks or financial intermediaries.
But while adequate for the purchase of provisions at the local general store, such forms of
money were clearly an imperfect medium of exchange and created otherwise unintended
credit exposures between agents.
18 The recent market turbulence offers a further reminder of the importance of resilient
infrastructure for conditions in financial markets. When markets are fragile, any interruption to
normal service could have particularly serious implications: further clouding judgements as to
individual participants’ solvency; undermining agents’ risk management; or affecting asset
prices in dependent markets. With volumes and values in several markets having hit record
levels during the market turmoil and remaining high for a sustained period, infrastructure
providers have experienced a severe stress test and, by and large, have passed with flying
colours. CLS, for instance, processed nearly 860,000 transactions (more than $8trn in value)
on 19th September, 2½ times the daily average in June.
4.

Current trends in the wholesale market infrastructure: new markets and new
demands.

19 Today, central banks around the world still typically provide the ultimate settlement
asset and sometimes operate, and also own, key components of the payment and settlement
infrastructure. For key elements of the infrastructure central banks have assumed an
oversight role. Depending on the particular regulatory architecture in place, this is sometimes
shared with the financial regulator, as in the UK.
20 But this is a dynamic environment: the landscape is broadening and deepening, with
niche market-specific facilities, cross-border systems, new entrants and commercial bank
providers becoming more important. New sources of risk are emerging, presenting new
challenges for central banks in their pursuit of monetary and financial stability.
Financial innovation and technological advancement
21 The way technology is transforming markets and therefore payment systems is
illustrated in the rapid growth in OTC derivatives markets; and the increased penetration of
electronic trading platforms – and automated trading strategies – across a range of markets.
22 According to data released by the Bank for International Settlements, notional amounts
outstanding in global OTC derivatives markets rose by almost 40% in 2006 – up more than
260% over the past five years. The outstanding value of the credit segment of the market
doubled in value in 2006 alone and trading activity has remained high through 2007,
especially during the recent market turmoil.
23 These markets have traditionally been cleared and settled via bilateral arrangements
between the counterparties to the trade, but new automated infrastructure services have
emerged, partly in response to an international regulatory initiative led by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY). Major dealers now confirm almost 90% of credit
derivatives trades electronically, as against less than 50% two years ago.
24 An important recent addition to the landscape is DTCC Deriv/SERV’s Trade
Information Warehouse, which maintains a so-called “golden copy” of each credit derivatives
trade. With appropriate interoperability between systems, these data can support a range of
ancillary services: calculating and settling payment obligations, managing collateral,
terminating trades and reconciling portfolios. The Warehouse is likely ultimately to be rolled
out for other products.
25 The declining cost of technology has also been a key driver of the rise of electronic
trading in recent years. Almost 60% of trade in foreign exchange is now executed
electronically and close to 50% in repo.

BIS Review 130/2007

3

26 Automated and algorithmic trading strategies are becoming more widespread across
asset classes. The London Stock Exchange (LSE) reports that the proportion of the order
flow on the exchange that is automated has risen from negligible amounts just four or five
years ago to approaching half today. This not only has implications for the scale of trading
activity – volumes have tripled on the LSE’s SETS system over the past five years – but also
the design and location of the trading infrastructure. For many algorithmic trading strategies,
processing speed is critical. The faster systems can process trades in just one or two
milliseconds: a tiny fraction of the blink of an eye. But ultimately speed and thus the ability to
gain a competitive advantage depends on proximity to the platform; hence, the old
geographical pull of markets has begun to re7 emerge with exchanges selling space near
their trading platforms to those who want to be first in the queue.
27 Many new entrants to the trading arena are therefore competing with incumbent
exchanges on the basis of processing speed. These new platforms are also looking for lower
cost post-trade solutions. As such, those emerging in Europe have looked beyond incumbent
providers: new entrants and commercial bank providers of clearing and settlement services
have featured strongly in their plans. Such providers not only aim to meet demands in terms
of flexibility and cost, but also to offer sufficient breadth to deliver a multicurrency clearing
and settlement service.
Globalisation, regulatory change and the market structure of infrastructure
28 This is part of a general reshaping of the infrastructural landscape in a global market
place. Market participants are becoming increasingly international, operating in multiple
markets and facing obligations in multiple currencies. Latest international banking data from
the Bank for International Settlements revealed growth in excess of 20% in reporting banks’
total cross-border claims in the year to end-Q1 2007, taking the total to $28.5trn.
29 Banks, therefore, seek infrastructural solutions that will accommodate the international
organisation of their businesses. So, while, historically, financial infrastructure has typically
evolved along national lines, cross-border alliances and mergers are now more common,
both in trading and post-trade: e.g., NYSE Euronext; LCH.Clearnet; Euroclear Group. And
alliances in the form of cross-border clearing and settlement links are also widespread,
enabling, for instance, securities traded in Italy to be settled and held in an account in the
securities settlement system in Germany.
30 Commercial bank providers – namely, correspondent banks and global custodians –
may be best placed to meet the demand for multicurrency settlement, leveraging their
extensive international connections. This could then reinforce their important position in the
infrastructural landscape. Indeed, the major global custodians each posted growth in assets
held in custody in excess of 20% in just the past year.
31 And differences between the regulatory regimes for incumbent providers of
infrastructure and those for either commercial bank providers or smaller new entrants could
tilt the playing field. For example, CLS is subject to close central bank scrutiny, operates as a
narrow bank, and has to meet exacting – and costly – resilience standards. New clearing
arrangements and bilateral netting schemes are now penetrating the foreign exchange
markets, threatening the volumes passing through CLS. In messaging, too, SWIFT – which
submits voluntarily to central bank oversight – is beginning to face competition in certain
markets from new entrants not subject to oversight. Authorities must be alert to the
challenges these competitive developments provide.
32 Other regulatory initiatives are contributing to a reshaping of the landscape. MiFID, in
the EU, and RegNMS, in the US, have sought to encourage increased competition in trading;
and the Code of Conduct, recently signed in the European Union, establishes terms under
which infrastructures operating in one member state can clear and settle (initially equity)
trades in another. More than 20 applications have now been made under the terms of the
Code.
4

BIS Review 130/2007

33 Whether trading, clearing and settlement infrastructure markets can support a wide
range of providers in the long-term remains an open question. There is generally a tendency
towards concentration in infrastructure provision because of increasing returns to scale in a
fixed cost business and often powerful network effects. This applies equally in the case of
commercial bank provision of infrastructure: ECB survey evidence reveals that the ten
largest correspondent banks in euro account for around 80% of correspondent banking
payment values; and the top-4 global custodians now account for three-quarters of total
assets in custody. Indeed, regulators have been giving increasing attention to the potential
systemic spillovers from operational or business failures at major commercial bank providers
of infrastructural services. That has led, for example, to the initiative in the US to implement
“New Bank”, a dormant shell company to take over the functions should one of the two major
clearers in the US Treasury market cease operations.
34 It may be that a competitive environment can be sustained, particularly as the cost of
technology falls, lowering barriers to entry, and liquidity bridges and other forms of
interoperability are established between systems. But, the jury is still out. Recent evidence
on the trading side, particularly in the US, is mixed: some trading platforms, such as
Archipelago and INET, have been swallowed up by the incumbent exchanges; others, such
as BATS Trading are thriving, keeping the pressure on the exchanges to cut costs and
upgrade their services.
35 I suspect what we are seeing is a redefinition of the market on an international scale. In
the process, national incumbents are being challenged by a combination of ambitious foreign
incumbents eager to exploit economies of scale and nimble, unencumbered new entrants
sometimes specialising in niche products. A process that is likely to lead in time to greater
consolidation at international level is currently manifesting itself in terms of fragmentation at
the national level as local incumbents are challenged.
36 The end-game may well be lower transaction costs at both the trade and post-trade
level and more concentrated (if not monopoly) cross-border infrastructure in each. But it may
take some time to reach a new equilibrium. Central banks and regulators need not only to
prepare for and perhaps help shape the end-game, but also address challenges arising
during the transition.

BIS Review 130/2007

5

5.
37
(i)

Issues and challenges for central banks and regulators going forward
Two key challenges, in particular, will need to be met:
Preserve enough influence to protect the collective interest while maintaining
a level regulatory playing field

38 The resilience and efficiency of the core infrastructure is an important public good and,
given the tendency to monopoly, the authorities need to ensure that they maintain sufficient
influence to ensure resilience in this increasingly complex landscape. That requires
consistent and objective criteria to be applied to new as well as established systems. Such
criteria might include: size – the volume and value of flows; type of flow – the extent to which
interdependencies are generated with other systems or underlying financial markets; and
substitutability – the potential for rerouting flows to other systems.
39 A changing market structure may also alter the nature of risks posed by the systems
themselves. For instance, to the extent that we are entering a phase of competing provision
of services at the national level, issues might arise around the potential fragmentation of
system liquidity. Equally, we are also seeing pressures for greater consolidation of systems
at an international level, where the challenges of lowering single point of failure risks remain
at the top of the agenda.
40 Where new services are offered by commercial bank providers, central banks need to
cooperate closely with banking supervisors to ensure that potential sources of financial
stability risk in their infrastructure roles are embedded within regulatory assessments.
Indeed, to the extent that new services are multicurrency in nature an international dialogue
may be necessary. I am pleased that the Basel Committees on Banking Supervision (BCBS)
and Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) have agreed to strengthen communication
between the committees, for example by holding joint meetings of sub-groups, which will
help to support this dialogue.
41 As recent events have underlined, regulation and public intervention can not only
change market incentives for the better but can also have unintended side effects. For
instance, the creation of the off-balance sheet vehicles at the centre of the recent market
turbulence may be seen in part as a response to the crude regime for capital charges
established under the original Basel Accord, under which liquidity facilities under a year in
maturity were exempt. That is being remedied under Basel II. But it is a reminder that we
need to be very careful to watch for these distortions in the regulation and oversight of
payment systems and other infrastructures, so as to ensure that we do not inadvertently alter
incentives in a way that may hamper the future development of the landscape.
42 This issue arises for example in the context of the establishment of ESCB-CESR
standards for securities settlement systems. The Bank of England supports the principle of
risk-based functional regulation, which implies that regulatory standards should be applied to
a function – such as settlement – regardless of the status of the institution providing that
function. We hope that further moves towards implementation will adhere to this principle,
thereby establishing a level regulatory playing field at least between CSDs and ICSDs, but
ideally also between traditional infrastructures and commercial banks offering infrastructural
services.
43 Finally, with a wider spectrum of participants, issues arise around the way in which
members interface with infrastructures. It is important to ensure that individual member
behaviour cannot threaten the smooth-functioning of the system. Some incidents during the
recent market turbulence revealed issues around members’ processing capacity, underlining
the value in member-level testing to ensure that participants can always support the delivery
of the network benefits from the smooth operation of the infrastructure.

6

BIS Review 130/2007

(ii)

Ensure effective international cooperation in oversight and operations, and
coordination in risk assessment activities

44 The second main challenge is to allow market participants to reap the benefits of
globalisation, while ensuring that the risks are adequately controlled. An extended and highly
connected network can simultaneously be both robust and fragile: robust, because risks may
be more effectively shared and dispersed across the system; fragile in that major risks can
flow more rapidly through the system.
45 Naturally, market participants have been pushing hard for the removal of obstacles to
efficient cross-border settlement and barriers to the seamless cross-currency management of
liquidity. Central banks have been urged to consider accepting foreign collateral or
implementing other arrangements to facilitate cross-currency liquidity management. Some
already do so – the Bank of England, for instance, routinely accepts euro-denominated
collateral in its operations – and a recent report from the CPSS encouraged other central
banks to consider accepting foreign collateral, at least in emergency circumstances. The
Eurosystem has recently begun to explore new options.
46 Provision of cross-border collateral arrangements may entail a high degree of
coordination and cooperation between central banks internationally, for instance in opening
custody and correspondent accounts, and sharing information on local infrastructures and
market practices.
47 More generally, strong international cooperation in the sphere of risk assessment and
crisis management responses is also clearly important. With increased links between
infrastructure providers in different centres and the emergence of new cross13 border
infrastructures, greater cooperation is also required in the conduct of oversight: not only in
terms of assessment of particular overseen cross-border infrastructures against international
standards, but also in identifying potential interdependencies between national
infrastructures. While existing cooperative arrangements work well, the model needs to
expand and continue to evolve.
6.

Concluding remarks

48 The resilience of the infrastructure of wholesale payment, clearing and settlement
systems to both operational and financial shocks remains a key requirement of financial and
monetary stability. But the landscape is changing fast in response to technological change
and the financial innovation and globalisation it allows. Cross border and global networks are
squeezing our national monopolies and commercial banks are playing an increasing role.
These changes present several challenges for central banks and regulators:
•

We need to establish and apply consistent criteria for the scope of oversight, in
order to maintain a level regulatory playing field;

•

We need to take full account of new interdependencies between systems when
assessing financial stability risks at a national and international level;

•

We need to work more closely together in risk assessment and oversight and
ensure that cross-border operational arrangements are robust ;

•

We need to ensure that financial stability risks posed by financial firms operating key
infrastructure functions are adequately captured in their regulation.

49 Meeting these challenges will deliver a robust, resilient financial infrastructure, which
the global financial system and the global economy depend upon.

BIS Review 130/2007

7

Rachel Lomax: Current monetary policy issues
Speech by Ms Rachel Lomax, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Hull &
Humber Chamber of Commerce, Hull, 22 November 2007.
I am very grateful to Gareth Ramsay for his help in preparing this speech, and to several other colleagues at the
Bank of England for useful comments.

*

*

*

Tonight I want to talk about the current issues confronting the Monetary Policy Committee.
It’s hard to tell the story of an economy as open as the UK without starting with global
developments. That’s not a point I need to labour here in Hull, the Gateway to Europe, and
home to a brand new World Trade centre. And it’s never been more true than today.
The past 4 years have seen the fastest growth in the world economy since the early 1970s 1 .
But even more striking than its pace has been the change in the balance of global growth,
with emerging economies contributing nearly three quarters of the increase in world output 2 .
This has become even more pronounced over the past year, as Chinese growth has picked
up even as the US economy has slowed.
The world’s economic see-saw has tilted. That’s the new reality behind two dramas that have
held the world’s attention since last August: the turmoil in financial markets; and the renewed
surge in energy prices.
Both these developments are highly unusual and very recent. No-one knows how they will
play out. So you would be right to take all forecasts – including our own – with a large pinch
of salt. But the MPC has to take a view, when it sets interest rates. My aim tonight will be to
share some of that thinking with you.
Financial market developments
Let me start with the problems in global financial markets.
Over the course of the summer, growing arrears in the US sub prime mortgage market
triggered a global loss of confidence in the valuation of securities backed by bundles of
mortgages and other loans. How could a relatively limited problem – confined to the bottom
end of the US housing market – spark a global financial crisis? It’s a good question.
The short answer goes as follows. Investors had come to rely too heavily on the ability of
rating agencies to value what had become exceedingly complex financial instruments. The
realisation that their faith had been misplaced cast doubt on the value of a wider class of
asset backed securities. Many of these were embedded in ever more complex, highly
leveraged, investment vehicles.
This set the stage for a period of turmoil in international money and credit markets which has
now been through several phases, and may go through several more.
At its heart, the problem is one of uncertainty.
First, there is great uncertainty about the eventual size of losses from defaults on US sub
prime mortgages that the global financial system will have to absorb. There are different
estimates and they change all the time as the news from the US housing market
deteriorates.

1

Calculated using purchasing power parity (PPP) exchange rates.

2

Again, calculated at PPP exchange rates.

BIS Review 136/2007

1

Second, there is great uncertainty about where these exposures will end up. So banks have
become more worried about the creditworthiness of their counterparties.
And third, this lack of information, in a complex and globally interconnected financial system,
breeds fear: of ratings downgrades, of fire sales and just of unknown consequences. And
fear breeds more uncertainty.
So banks have been hoarding liquidity, to protect themselves against further upsets; and
they have become more reluctant to lend to other banks. So the rates at which they lend to
each other have risen, relative to the levels which are expected to be set by central banks.
The squeeze in core liquidity markets has already been unusually prolonged. And it is very
hard to say when conditions will return to something more like normal. When the dust has
settled, the financial landscape may look a bit different. Investors may be more aware of risk
and warier of complexity. Some recent financial innovations will disappear. Others may
survive but in modified form, and probably at an increased cost to final borrowers.
What does all this mean for UK monetary policy? The MPC’s remit is to keep inflation at its
2% target, so the key issue for us is how far the financial crisis will affect the wider economy.
That will depend on the answer to three broad questions.
First, in the short term, how far will the severe liquidity squeeze that has already happened
turn in to a full scale credit crunch – by which I mean a sharp tightening in the price and
availability of credit to households and firms.
Second, how well placed are households and firms to weather any such change in credit
conditions?
And third, in the longer term, will there be a significant lasting impact on credit conditions, for
any given level of Bank Rate?
It is too early to answer these questions with any great confidence, especially the last. But
we do have some early evidence.
There are signs that credit conditions facing firms have already tightened. The terms on
corporate bank borrowing are often directly linked to the rates that banks charge each other.
These rates have risen and remained high. Our latest intelligence suggests that the main
lenders have tightened the terms on which they are willing to lend to businesses, and they
plan to tighten them further. UK firms’ financial position is currently pretty healthy, on
average, and large corporate borrowers in particular may have good alternatives to bank
borrowing. But smaller and more highly geared firms may be more adversely affected.
In time tighter credit conditions could mean weaker business investment, though so far
forward indicators of investment intentions still point to fairly strong growth. And any marked
increased in uncertainty about demand conditions could lead to investment plans being
shelved. But it is still early days – too early to draw strong conclusions about the size of
these effects.
Even more uncertainty surrounds the possible impact of tighter credit conditions on
household spending, which alone accounts for three fifths of total domestic demand. There is
already some evidence that banks are tightening the price and non-price terms on which they
lend, especially to borrowers with relatively poor credit histories. And quoted fixed rate
mortgage rates have already risen relative to market expectations of Bank Rate – though
since markets now expect Bank Rate to fall instead of rising, the pick up in actual mortgage
rates remains quite small.
Overall, households seem to be in a relatively strong position: debt has risen a lot relative to
incomes, but so too have holdings of financial and real assets. Mortgage arrears and
repossessions remain well below their peak levels in the early 1990s. But the share of
income which needs to be devoted to interest rate payments was already set to rise sharply,

2

BIS Review 136/2007

largely as a result of rising debt levels. And there is a growing minority of households who
are reporting difficulties with their debts.
In short, it looks as if events in financial markets are beginning to affect the terms offered to
retail borrowers. This should act as a brake on consumer spending and investment. But the
size of this effect is highly uncertain, partly because so far it seems to be focussed on certain
groups. Much may depend on whether recent developments shake consumers’ confidence in
future income growth and employment – and so far that does not seem to have happened.
What about possible longer term effects on the price and availability of credit?
Over the past three years, competition and financial innovation have put steady downward
pressure on the rates at which banks have been prepared to lend, at any given level of Bank
Rate. Between 2003 and the beginning of this year, 2-year-fixed mortgage rates fell by
around 50bps relative to the wholesale interest rates they are usually priced off. This is one
reason why credit has gone on rising so strongly, despite increases in official interest rates.
At this stage, we can only speculate about what will happen next. My guess is that over the
next 3-5 years, we will see a sustained – though not necessarily complete – reversal in these
trends, as banks re-appraise the risks around certain business models and complex financial
instruments. This would increase the cost of credit to final borrowers, for any given policy
rate.
If that happens, this summer’s crisis will influence the economy – and potentially the interest
rates set by the MPC – for some time to come.
Energy prices
Let me now turn to the second of the global developments I mentioned earlier: higher energy
prices.
During the past month , the oil price has threatened to breach the $100 a barrel. Just last
January a barrel of oil cost $55; four years ago, it cost less than $30. Some of this is due to
the weakness of the dollar. But the rise in sterling terms has been pretty spectacular too –
from £17 a barrel four years ago, to £27 last January, to around £45 now. At these levels, oil
is almost back to its 1979 high, after correcting for inflation 3 .
What’s going on? It’s always hard to disentangle underlying demand and supply factors from
the speculative froth. It’s possible to point to some short run factors behind the recent surge.
Stocks of oil across the OECD economies have been falling, at a time of year when they
should be rising. This reflects temporary supply disruptions such as weather-related
problems in Mexico and in the North Sea. As production comes back on stream, the market
should ease.
But short-run influences can only have this kind of leverage over the price because
underlying market conditions are so tight. World demand for oil has been boosted by a strong
world economy, led by booming emerging markets. China alone has been responsible for a
third of the growth in global oil demand over the past four years. Meanwhile supply has
struggled to keep pace – partly because of policy decisions by oil producing economies, but
partly because it takes quite a long time for investment in extra production capacity to come
on stream.
What are the risks that oil prices will stay around their current level for a time – and maybe
go even higher? It’s hard to say – but the market is not discounting the possibility of even
higher oil prices. Options prices point to an increase in near-term uncertainty – and an
increasing concern about further large price rises.

3

Using US consumer expenditure deflator to adjust for inflation.

BIS Review 136/2007

3

There are risks on the downside too: the last time the world economy slowed significantly, oil
prices slumped. Could a slowdown in the world economy cause oil prices to collapse again?
Projections for the growth in oil demand over 2007 and 2008 have been revised downwards
a little recently. But much may depend on the pattern of any slowdown – and in particular
whether China continues to expand strongly even as the US economy slows.
What’s the likely impact of higher oil prices on the UK economy? Twenty or thirty years ago,
sharp increases in energy prices coincided with much higher inflation and much lower
growth. Over the last four years, our experience has been very different: inflation has been
better behaved, and growth much steadier. There are several reasons for that, including
major changes to the energy intensity and flexibility of the UK economy. But one important
difference has been monetary policy. Unlike in the 1970s, the MPC’s focus has very clearly
been on controlling inflation.
Today, higher energy prices are an important influence on interest rate decisions. That is
because they have an immediate impact on inflation, which has the potential to fuel
inflationary expectations. And they may also affect the balance between overall demand and
supply, though it is hard to judge the timing and size of this effect. Soaring oil prices were an
important reason why some members of the MPC, including myself, were reluctant to cut
interest rates when the economy slowed in 2005.
The policy dilemma
Today, in 2007, global developments – in financial and oil markets – are posing downside
risks to output as well as upside risks to inflation. That’s a very difficult combination. So how
well placed is the UK economy to weather these headwinds?
As far as output goes, we start from a strong position. The latest official figures show annual
growth still above its average rate, as it has been for more than a year, reflecting robust
domestic spending by households and businesses as well as a buoyant world economy. But
in the last month, the businesses surveys have started to weaken – a few quite sharply. And
retail spending may be slackening, though heavy discounting has clouded the underlying
picture. There are clearer signs that the slowdown in the housing market is gathering pace.
But the impact of this on consumer spending and ultimately on inflation is highly uncertain.
And that is what matters for monetary policy.
So growth does now seem to be slowing. But what is less clear is whether the scale of this
easing is likely to be broadly what we need to keep inflation on target in the medium term –
neither too much nor too little. That’s not just because we don’t know how much slowing is in
the pipeline. There are a couple of other important uncertainties too.
First, it’s hard to judge the underlying strength of inflationary pressures.
When inflation picked up quite sharply last winter, there was a lively debate about how far
this reflected strong monetary growth, and how far it was due to the temporary effect of a
very big jump in gas and electricity prices. Although inflation has now come down sharply,
there is still room for debate about the margin of spare capacity in the economy. Various
indicators seem to be telling slightly different stories. On the one hand, overall wage growth
seems to have been moderate, by past standards. On the other hand, business surveys of
capacity pressures and price expectations remain above average.
Second, there is a lot of uncertainty about the risks to inflation, if oil prices do continue at
their present levels. Should we take heart from the relatively muted impact of previous
increases in oil prices? Or does the fact that workers had already absorbed the impact of a
doubling in oil prices since 2004, even before the latest surge, make it more not less likely
that they will hold out for higher pay?
A key point for the MPC is that its own actions will help to determine how far oil prices have a
lasting impact on inflation. There are always risks in signalling that policy will be eased, at a

4

BIS Review 136/2007

time of rising energy prices. This is all the more so after a year when inflation has been
above target and on some measures remains uncomfortably high.
On the other hand, we need to be very alert to the risk that the economy may be slowing too
abruptly. At current interest rate levels, monetary policy may be on the restrictive side.
And the duration and impact of financial turbulence is very hard to call. There must be a risk
that at some stage it will spill over into asset and property markets more generally, and
trigger a damaging loss of confidence.
Conclusions
The MPC faces a tricky period as we try to weigh the risk of an unduly sharp downturn,
against the threat to inflation posed by a sharp surge in global energy prices. Much will
depend on developments in the rest of the world; on whether the slump in the US housing
market causes a sharp slowing in the wider US economy: and on how far this acts as a brake
on demand – and inflationary pressures – in the rest of the world, especially Asia and the
euro area.
The projections we published in last week’s Inflation Report were centred around a relatively
mild slowdown, by historical standards – on the same scale as we experienced in 2005 –
based on the assumption of a gradual and modest easing in interest rates over the next two
years. But those projections are subject to a very wide margin of error – in both directions.
The MPC’s monthly decisions are always grounded in a careful analysis of all the evidence.
Given the uncertainties we face, now is a time to pay extra attention to the emerging data.
We can, and should, respond quickly and flexibly to early signs of the changing economic
weather. According to most recent official economic statistics, the weather is still set fair. But
we know fouler weather is brewing off shore. What is still far from clear is whether we are in
for a force 6 strong breeze, or a full force 8 gale.
We will need to deploy all our meteorological skills. In the Inflation Report we highlighted a
number of early warning indicators on both output and inflation, which will help us judge the
strength of the wind. These include the reports from our own Agents around the country,
drawing businesses such as your own. If you are one of our regular contacts, let me take this
opportunity to thank you warmly on behalf of the MPC for your help. We may be making
additional demands on you over the coming months. I hope my remarks tonight have helped
to explain why your co operation is so necessary – and so valuable.

BIS Review 136/2007

5

Paul Tucker: Money and credit – banking and the macroeconomy
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy
Committee of the Bank of England, at the Monetary Policy and the Markets Conference,
London, 13 December 2007.
My thanks for comments and/or for background work to Peter Andrews, Charlie Bean, Tim Besley, Roger Clews,
Andy Haldane, Colin Miles, James Proudman and Iain de Weymarn. Special thanks to Jing Yang and Alex
Haberis. For comments and background work to Damien Lynch. And for secretarial support to Sandra Bannister
and Cheryl Feeney.

*

*

*

Each month the MPC sets a policy rate, Bank Rate, that will prevail until our next policy
meeting. But no one – here today, in the market, or on the Committee – thinks that setting
the overnight money market rate for the coming 30 days can be enough to steer demand
conditions and maintain stable inflation. Rather, policy works on the basis of expectations of
the path of the Bank Rate in the future, and of how our policy settings will vary according to
economic conditions: the so-called “reaction function”.
Perceptions of the reaction function therefore matter a lot and a great deal of effort goes into
being transparent about the three inputs: the Committee’s objective; the MPC’s views on the
shocks to demand and supply affecting the economy; and our views on how the economy
works and how our policy settings affect it. This conference is focused on one important
element of this: the role of financial markets in the setting and transmission of monetary
policy. That is covered in the Bank’s publications on how the economy works, including the
Committee’s 1999 paper on the Monetary Transmission Mechanism (MTM), and books
describing the models used in forecasting. 1 But those high-level descriptions miss out an
awful lot about how the real and financial parts of the economy connect. Financial variables
are limited to the short-term interest rate, the exchange rate, and equities. Nothing on the
role of long-maturity interest rates, or on credit spreads and risk premia – which misses out a
whole universe of financial asset prices. Very little on credit more generally. Next to nothing
on money. And nothing at all on the role of bank intermediation.
These gaps were perhaps underlined by a degree of confusion amongst commentators
about the way in which Money and Credit featured somewhat more prominently in the
Committee’s discussions during the backend of 2006 and into this year (Chart 1). With both
having been strong for a while, some asked whether this marked some kind of change in the
reaction function, implying a greater stress on nominal variables.
Given the near identity of deposits and bank lending, Money and Credit are often used
almost inseparably, even interchangeably, with wider measures of non-bank credit looked at
only when assessing the health of corporate and household sector balance sheets. But in
some circumstances one can do better to approach things the other way round, starting with
general credit conditions, examining the interactions of non-bank and bank lending, and then
broad money as a (partial) counterpart to M4L. My remarks today will follow that structure,
which will provide a framework for some observations about the current tightening in credit
conditions, as well as about the preceding expansion.

1

“The transmission mechanism of monetary policy”, a paper by the Monetary Policy Committee at the Bank of
England, April 1999 and Harrison R., K. Nikolov, M. Quinn, G. Ramsay, A Scott and R. Thomas, “The Bank of
England Quarterly Model”, Bank of England 2005. The Bank’s wider “suite of models” does include richer
asset price channels.

BIS Review 149/2007

1

Credit
Credit is, of course, vital to any economy, enabling households and firms to make choices
about whether to bring forward or defer spending from income. There are conditions in which
it would play no active role, passively reflecting cyclical fluctuations in output, employment
and inflation. In a world of more or less complete transparency between borrowers and
lenders, very low transactions costs, and very low risk aversion, access to credit would not
be rationed; and ex ante yields on financial assets, including loans and bonds, would not
embody risk premia. So if households and firms wanted to bring forward spending in the face
of shocks to the economy, they would be able to do so restricted only by their need to remain
solvent.
But nobody believes that that is a description of the real world in which households and
companies manage their affairs. Both are, to a greater or lesser degree, rationed in their
access to credit, given that borrowers know a great deal more about their conditions and
prospects than do risk-averse lenders, and that lenders face obstacles in ensuring that
borrowers honour their contracts. 2 The availability, price and terms of credit– whether
unsecured or secured – will be sensitive to a range of factors, including assessments of the
idiosyncratic risks of a particular borrower, and the risks common across borrowers.
Variations in these factors give rise to the possibility of a credit cycle.
A borrower’s ability to pledge collateral can help to overcome the problems of “asymmetric
information” and enforceability, by evidencing its net worth and giving it a continuing stake in
its contract with the lender. This can give rise to the so-called “financial accelerator” channel
of the Monetary Transmission Mechanism (MTM), in which monetary policy works partly by
affecting lending terms through its effect on asset values and so the net worth of borrowers. 3
But credit conditions also depend on the access to credit of the lenders themselves. There is
an important distinction here between intermediation across bank balance sheets and via the
capital markets, although as I shall describe it turns out to be blurred.
Total credit: capital markets and securitisation
For the moment, I shall put that distinction to one side in order to focus on total credit. A
series of environmental changes over the past decade or so have affected the quantity and
price of credit generally. Greater macroeconomic stability, and perceptions that it will persist
more or less uninterrupted, probably increased the supply of credit; and by reducing risk
premia, may have increased demand too (Diagram A).
Other developments are more likely to have worked purely through credit supply. The most
obvious is the growth of instruments such as credit derivatives and securitisation, associated
with an increased role for rating agencies in monitoring credit risk. This was in effect a shock
to technology, making portfolios transferable. By offering the prospect of better meeting
desired risk profiles and by separating origination from investment, it has brought more nonbank financial institutions, and so more capital resources, into the credit markets, increasing
the supply of credit (Diagram B).
This seems to have been borne out in the significant shift in actual credit quantities and
prices up to the middle of this year.
In the United Kingdom, non-bank lenders have accounted for a greater share of credit
extension to both the household and corporate sectors (Charts 2-4).

2

Stiglitz, J. E. and A. Weiss (1981), “Credit rationing in markets with imperfect information”, The American
Economic Review, Vol. 71, No. 3, pp 393-410.

3

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1989), “Agency cost, net worth, and business fluctuations”, The American
Economic Review, March 1989, pp 14-31.

2

BIS Review 149/2007

A lot of that has been securitised (Chart 5). For the household sector, spreads on securitised
portfolios of both secured and unsecured credit fell between 2003 and 2005 (Chart 6). That
will have contributed to the fall in effective rates on the underlying mortgages and personal
loans (Chart 7).
The same broad picture holds for the corporate sector (Chart 8). An illustrative
decomposition suggests that, especially for sub-investment grade borrowers, the
compression of spreads could not be explained solely by reduced compensation for default
risk, with the excess possibly reflecting lower liquidity premia (Chart 9). 4
These falls in spreads were material relative to the changes in the MPC’s Bank Rate and to
the risk-free yield curve. For example, in the latest “policy cycle”, we increased Bank Rate by
125bp over 11 months from August 2006. During that period, effective rates on new
mortgages rose by closer to 50bp. In other words, from around 2003, monetary policy
needed to take account of a progressive loosening of credit conditions.
The tables have now turned. Spreads have risen; the issuance of securitised portfolios of
household loans has collapsed; corporate bond issuance has fallen (Charts 10-11). It is
pretty clear that, for the time being, there has been an adverse shift in the supply of credit
from the non-banking sector. In part, that seems to be due to investors becoming less
confident that they can base decisions about exposures to complex credit portfolios on rating
agency ratings; this is akin to lenders deciding that their monitoring of risk was less good
than they thought. In part, it is due to various types of non-bank investor in credit finding
themselves facing actual or incipient liquidity pressures. Both as cause and effect, liquidity in
the capital markets is impaired. This is apparent in the opening up of a so-called “negative
basis” between the spreads on corporate bond and on equivalent credit-default swaps, which
unbundle the transfer of credit risk from the provision of funds and so are less affected by
liquidity hoarding (Chart 12).
A twin-engine financial system?
At various times over the past decade or so, it had been argued 5 that the macroeconomy as
a whole should be more resilient to shocks to a financial system with “twin engines” –
combining capital markets with banking system intermediation of savings and credit. The
argument is that when the capital markets are impaired, banking can take more of the
burden, and vice versa. I have a good deal of sympathy for this view – but not for all
circumstances. It rather overstates the independence of capital markets and banking, as
recent developments graphically demonstrate.
First, whether through financing the purchase of credit assets by leveraged funds or
warehousing portfolios prior to sale or providing “liquidity lines” to conduits and other
investment vehicles, the banking system puts its capital and liquidity behind the distribution
of credit risk to the wider asset-manager universe. As the official sector stressed over recent
years, it is important to be clear about the circumstances in which risk can flow back to the
banking system. 6
Second, the “twin engines” view draws too absolute a line between banks and non-bank
financial intermediaries. Alongside other asset managers, banks have been material
investors in securitised credit. In some respects, it may be more useful to distinguish

4

See Churm R., and L. Webber (2007), “Decomposing corporate bond spreads”, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, Q4 2007 (forthcoming).

5

Alan Greenspan made this point a few times.

6

For example see Tucker P M W (2007), “A perspective on recent monetary and financial system
developments”, speech at Merrill Lynch Conference on Hedge Funds, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Q3
2007, pp 310-16.

BIS Review 149/2007

3

between intermediaries on the basis of whether they undertake some combination of maturity
transformation, leveraging their balance sheets, and mark-to-market valuations. Banks are
not alone in having these characteristics, and so there can be common shocks to bank and
non-bank investors. In a recent series of papers, 7 Hyun Shin has argued that balance sheet
management of this kind amplifies the credit cycle. That sounds like the “financial
accelerator” model, except that Shin’s position is that the outcomes can exceed those
warranted by fundamentals. His argument is that in the upswing of a business cycle, the rise
in asset values increases the accounting net worth of banks and other intermediaries,
enabling them to leverage up their balance sheets. This expands credit; and increases the
liquidity in capital markets, reducing liquidity premia embodied in asset prices; and so on.
And when the music stops, the process can be reversed as falls in asset values, leverage
and liquidity feed on each other. (For Shin, the villain is mark-to-market accounting, although
I would not want its virtues in reducing forbearance to be overlooked.)
Thirdly, the “twin engines” view may place insufficient weight on banks having remained the
principal originators of credit, given that small firms and households cannot issue bonds
directly into the capital markets. It has been argued that the growth of markets for securitising
loan portfolios made banks less relevant to overall credit conditions, and so to the business
cycle, because a bank’s ability to originate credit becomes less intimately bound up with its
own financial strength. 8 But if, as currently, the capital markets’ appetite for securitised credit
diminishes, a larger proportion of loans will after all remain on the balance sheets of banks.
All this brings back into focus the potential macroeconomic relevance of bank lending.
Bank lending
The economic literature on the “bank lending” channel of the Monetary Transmission
Mechanism explores the conditions under which a tightening of monetary policy causes the
terms on bank lending to tighten over and above the increase in risk-free short-term real
rates. The literature has typically assumed (i) that a monetary policy tightening is effected by
the central bank withdrawing reserves from the system (or slowing the pace of reserves
injection); (ii) that banks are required to hold a proportion of transactions deposits in
reserves, so that reduced reserves provision entails slower deposit growth; and (iii) that they
do not have unrestricted access to liabilities that are not subject to reserves requirements,
and so cannot fill the gap left by slower deposit growth and must, instead, slow loan growth,
which they do by tightening credit conditions. 9 The first two steps seem archaic. We effect
monetary policy changes by controlling the price not the quantity of central bank money in
the system; and, in the UK, banks choose their own reserves targets rather than having them
determined by a balance sheet ratio of some kind.
But the third plank in these models – restricted access to non-deposit liabilities, whether
capital-like or not – plainly is still relevant today. In a world of asymmetric information, banks
do not have unrestricted access to resources, and we do not believe that a bank’s lending

7

Adrian, Tobias, and H. S. Shin (2007), “Liquidity, Monetary Policy and Financial Cycles”, paper prepared for
Current Issues in Economics and Finance. Adrian, Tobias and H S Shin, (2007), “Liquidity and Financial
Cycles”, paper presented at the 6th BIS annual conference on “Financial System and Macroeconomic
Resilience”. Analytically, the argument, as summarised in the main text, needs to be supplemented with a
mechanism that somehow impedes checks and balances from preventing the overshooting of fundamentals.

8

Loutskina E. and P. E. Strahan (2006), “Securitisation and the declining impact of bank finance on loan
supply: evidence from mortgage acceptance rates”, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working
Papers, No. 11983. And Estrella, A. (2002), “Securitization and the efficiacy of monetary policy”, Economic
Policy Review, Vol. 8, No.1.

9

For an overview of early work see Kashyap, A. K. and J. C. Stein (1994),”Monetary policy and bank lending”,
in G. N. Mankiw, ed., Monetary policy, Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 29. pp. 221-56.

4

BIS Review 149/2007

behaviour is invariant to its capital gearing or to the composition of its liabilities. 10 We do,
therefore, face questions about the extent to which a shock to banks’ liquidity or capital
resources can bring about a shift in credit conditions with macroeconomic effects that, other
things being equal, monetary policy should seek to offset in order to maintain aggregate
demand in line with aggregate supply.
Over the past 15 years or so, when banks have seemed anything but restricted, easier
access to liquidity or capital may have brought about a progressive relaxation of bank lending
conditions. That this featured in commentary on monetary policy rather less than the recent
manifest tightening may say no more than that sharp contractions attract more attention than
gradual expansions. In a similar vein, on the whole, research does better at identifying these
“credit channel” mechanisms in the context of particular stressed episodes than in longer-run
averages. 11
Be that as it may, it is beyond doubt that there has recently been an adverse shock to bank
balance sheets – involving capital, liquidity, and a potent “asymmetric” information
mechanism affecting a wide range of banks. I will pick out four elements in the story,
involving liquidity, counterparty-credit risk and capital.
First, near closure of the capital markets for leveraged loans, conduit and SIV commercial
paper, and RMBS has left banks whose business model is “originate and distribute”
unexpectedly holding on to loans and, in addition, facing the prospect of having to take
assets back on to their balance sheets. The consequent reintermediation is a hit to both
capital ratios and liquidity, as the banks have bigger books to fund. For these reasons alone,
big picture, banks responded from August onwards by tightening loan terms and hoarding
liquidity.
But the story does not end there. The second element is that access to resources (uninsured
deposits) from outside the banking sector has become more restricted since the summer.
While the new risk-transfer instruments have plainly dispersed risks, lack of ex ante
disclosure left market participants highly uncertain about the scale and distribution of losses
across the banking sector itself. On top of that, open-ended investment vehicles that have (or
may have) themselves invested in structured-finance paper have felt compelled to preserve
liquidity, to guard against redemption risk. And one significant source of demand for bank
hybrid-capital instruments over the past half-decade or so, the SIVs, has been turned off due
to their own funding problems. Taken together, the upshot for the banking system has been a
shortening in the maturity of wholesale deposits, and an intermittent tightening of access to
hybrid capital instruments (Chart 13).
Coming on top of an involuntary increase in risk-weighted assets and reduced access to term
liquidity, the third component of the shock, apparent since late autumn, has been some
actual impairment of capital resources. Large banks especially have progressively written
down the values of structured-finance assets, reflecting deterioration in the underlying
position of the US household sector and in the values of a wide range of leveraged
instruments. But the adjustment is drawn out, partly due to uncertainty about appropriate
mark-to-market valuations given the impaired liquidity in ABS markets. To avoid this process
amplifying the credit cycle, 12 some replenishment of common equity may be needed, and
has already begun.

10

In a Modigliani-Miller world of perfect capital markets, a bank’s overall cost of funds is independent of its
capital and funding structure. As a result the level of bank capital and the balance of wholesale and retail
funding are not relevant to bank lending decisions and so do not affect the monetary transmission mechanism.

11

Bernanke, B. S. and C. S. Lown (1991), “The credit crunch”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2,
pp. 204-39.

12

Ashcraft, A. B., and M. Campello (2002), “Borrowers' financial constraints and the transmission of monetary
policy: evidence from financial conglomerates”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Reports: 153.

BIS Review 149/2007

5

The fourth element in the story, underway since August, has been distributional. Banks
relatively reliant on wholesale funding have bid up for funds. But doing so has been taken as
an adverse signal, prompting further rationing of wholesale money market lending at term
maturities and potentially deterring the strong from entering the market; this is what is known
as a “Lemons” problem 13 . In the United Kingdom, since August, mortgage approvals and
secured lending have declined by more at the medium-sized mortgage banks and specialist
lenders than at the largest UK banks, partly due to Northern Rock (Charts 14-15). This was
symmetric. Their mortgage portfolios grew faster over the previous years. All told, this looks
like a manifestation of the Kashyap and Stein finding, in various non-UK settings, that lending
is more cyclically variable at banks that start off with weaker balance sheets; 14 or, as I would
prefer to put it, with concentrated income streams and/or funding sources.
Won’t the macroeconomic effect of this be dampened by the bigger and more diversified
banks picking up the slack? It is important to distinguish the longer term from the near term.
The longer-term impact will depend on whether the structure of the industry shifts. The
securitisation boom seems to have altered the terms of trade in UK banking for a while. By
reducing reliance on retail deposits, it reduced barriers to entry. Lenders’ margins fell (Chart
16), and credit conditions in the UK mortgage market eased. Conversely, the painful
reminder that undiversified funding and income sources may leave a bank unusually
vulnerable will probably bring about another shock to the structure of the market. The
persistent tightening in mortgage credit that that would bring was a factor in the MPC’s
November projections.
In the near term, the extent to which the big or more diversified banks fill the gap will depend
on the extent to which they too preserve capital and liquidity in the face of the harsh
environment I have described.
Money, or bank intermediation
So far I have focused entirely on credit. Where does this leave money (or Money), the
starting point for much traditional monetary analysis?
Well, much that I have said about banks – their capacity, in the short run, to lever up their
balance sheets and expand credit at will; their role in providing liquidity insurance to
investment vehicles and corporates – turns precisely on their liabilities being money. And for
this reason, banks are after all decisively different from other intermediaries.
As transactions balances and so the means of exchange in our payments system, the
moneyness of bank deposits lies at the core of credit intermediation. Subject only but
crucially to confidence in their soundness, banks extend credit by simply increasing the
borrowing customer’s current account, which can be paid away to wherever the borrower
wants by the bank “writing a cheque on itself”. That is, banks extend credit by creating
money. This “money creation” process is constrained: by their need to manage the liquidity
risk – from the withdrawal of deposits and the draw-down of back-up lines – to which it

13

Akerlof, G. A. (1970), “The market for “lemons”: quality uncertainty and the market mechanism”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, No. 3, pp. 488-500. A market for “lemons” issue arises when informational
deficiencies give rise to uncertainty about the true quality of a product. In such circumstances, buyers choose
to pay only average prices for goods that carry the risk of sellers overstating their true quality. As a result,
sellers of good products, having little incentive to participate in such markets, are driven out by those sellers of
poor quality products. The most common example of the problem is the market for used new cars. Rationing
in the interbank markets is discussed by Freixas, X. and J. Jorge (2007) in “The role of interbank markets in
monetary policy: a model with rationing”, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Economics Working Papers.

14

Kashyap, A. K. and J. C. Stein (2000), “What do a million observations say about the transmission of
monetary policy”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 3, pp. 407-28.

6

BIS Review 149/2007

exposes them. 15 Adequate capital and liquidity, including for stressed circumstances, are the
essential ingredients for maintaining confidence. 16
If that excursion into the realm of financial stability appears to have drifted away from the
immediate issue of Money, it is because the health of bank balance sheets is relevant to both
the demand for money and its supply, even if this is apparent only occasionally.
Charles Goodhart has already, and very usefully, stressed the importance of recovering the
notion of shocks to the supply of broad money. 17 In the main, however, in terms of the
underlying drivers, we are talking here of shifts in the supply of broad money caused by
shocks to the supply of bank lending: banks create money by extending credit (Diagram C).
And as discussed earlier, key drivers in terms of bank balance sheet growth include the
variables that underpin bankers’ confidence in borrowers; and, conversely, confidence in
banks themselves. It should come as no surprise that the “credit channel” macroeconomic
literature converged with bankers in focusing on the tangible collateral available from
borrowers, and on their own capital and liquidity (which includes the ex ante and ex post
terms on which they have access to central bank reserves).
Some important things can be said about this account of shifts in the supply of broad money.
First, in contrast to the textbook account of shocks to the Money supply via the proverbial
helicopter drop of base money (pound notes), firms and households are not caught in a bind
where, in aggregate, they are forced to hold the increased supply of broad money, even if it
exceeds demand. Following a shock to the supply of credit, in which some people or
companies become less credit constrained, it will be open to others to reduce their existing
borrowing as the extra money circulates around the economy via the purchase of goods,
services and financial assets.
Second, and more important, the shocks to credit supply are, in themselves, real not nominal
shocks. And like other real shocks, causing changes in the balance of Aggregate Demand
and Aggregate Supply, there is a nominal effect only if monetary policy does not respond via
alterations to the path of short-term interest rates to keep the economy on a stable path and
in line with the inflation target.
Absent an appropriate policy response, the easing in monetary conditions would in time feed
into inflation through an expansion of nominal spending. In the first instance, the expansion
of “liquidity” represented by faster money growth may sometimes work through asset prices.
That is because with imperfect substitution between different kinds of financial assets,
relative risk premia may be altered, which in turn may affect borrowing conditions in capital
markets. 18
With an appropriate policy response, what should we expect to see in bank balance sheets,
in broad money growth, following a credit-supply shock? It might be that the path for broad

15

See Kashyap, A. K., R. Rajan and J. C Stein (2002), “Banks as liquidity providers: an explanation for the
coexistence of lending and deposit-taking”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 57, No. 1, pp 33–73.

16

Acharya, V. V., H. S. Shin and T. Yorulmazer (2007), “Fire sales, foreign entry and bank liquidity”, C.E.P.R
Discussion Paper, No. 6309.

17

See Goodhart, C. A. E. (2007), “Whatever Became of the Monetary Aggregates?”, Peston Lecture at Queen
Mary College, London; King M. A. (2007), “The MPC ten years on”, lecture to the Society of Business
Economists, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2007, pp 272-85; and Tucker P. M. W. (2007),
“Central banking and political economy: the example of the UK’s Monetary Policy Committee” speech at the
Inflation Targeting, Central Bank Independence and Transparency Conference, Cambridge, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, Autumn 2007, pp445-52.

18

There is an echo here of a channel stressed by Brunner & Melter, but with the impulse coming from the central
bank’s short-term interest rate rather than the quantity of reserves, and the transmission into risk premia and
so other asset prices coming via the expected path of the policy rate and broad money rather than via narrow
money.

BIS Review 149/2007

7

money should be unaltered in the medium term. In other words, a persistent acceleration (or
deceleration) of M4 would be indicative of a nominal shock, jeopardising achievement of the
inflation target. The world is not so simple, however. The underlying drivers of the change in
the supply of bank lending, and so in broad money, may also bring about shifts in the
demand for money, validating a different level for real money balances – perhaps most
obviously, if investment and so the economy’s productive capacity were affected.
For some underlying shocks, it is probably better to think about the effects on banking
intermediation rather than simply on bank lending. Faced with a change in their costs and
opportunities, bankers might sometimes be able to adjust the terms on either their assets or
their liabilities (or both). Currently, banks have incurred an adverse shock to their wholesale
funding (Chart 17). The evidence so far suggests that, as well as tightening terms for
borrowers, they are improving rates offered on retail deposits.
Where does that leave us on Money? It is clear enough from the long-run relationship
between money growth and inflation that prolonged shifts in money growth can be an amber
light (Chart 18). And possible liquidity effects mean that, through risk premia, shifts in the
quantity of money may feed back into financial asset markets and so into broader credit
conditions. But there are no “easy wins” when it comes to analysing Money demand and
supply. 19
Money and credit in the current conjuncture
Those challenges are certainly apparent right now. Judging from a combination of market
intelligence, surveys and prices, there is no doubt that credit conditions for both households
and firms have tightened materially. The Bank’s new Credit Conditions Survey, published for
the first time in September, recorded a clear tightening in availability of credit to corporates
over the previous quarter. A month later, a mini-survey unsurprisingly revealed tighter
conditions for households too. 20 Spreads on corporate and household credit are already
higher across the board; and for risky borrowers, financing costs have risen notwithstanding
the fall in risk-free yields.
Since August, the MPC has stressed, however, that it will not be sufficient in these
circumstances to look solely at the price of credit, as there could be increased quantity
rationing. The standard view is that households and small firms are more likely to be
adversely affected in such circumstances than large firms, which typically have greater
access to capital markets. But as this disturbance affected the wholesale loan markets, we
will need to monitor conditions for corporate bond and loan issuance. Indeed, we will need to
look at total credit, and carefully across different sectors to track the impact of the tightening.
But timely and rich data are available on just bank lending. And interpreting them is not
straightforward given the nature of the shock to the system. If reintermediation is significant,
banks will be taking back on to their balance sheets conduit and investment vehicle paper or
just holding onto loans for longer than usual before they can be sold onto the capital markets.

19

Perhaps nothing illustrates this as cleanly as the advent of credit derivatives. Derivatives of any kind unbundle
funding (and so liquidity risk) from the underlying risk to which an agent is seeking exposure via a particular
contract. So a credit derivative unbundles credit risk from funding. This further complicates interpretation of the
bank lending data (M4L). Imagine that, due to their customer networks and screening capability, banks
originate all credit, but that they use credit-default swaps to shed a great portion of the credit risk via CDS to
non-bank financial institutions. In the limit, this would be a world in which M4L correctly measured (bank)
lending and M4 was one useful measure of “liquidity”. But it would also be a world in which shocks to credit
conditions from capital and risk appetite worked largely through non-bank lenders, and in which shocks to
liquidity worked largely through depositor confidence in the banking system. In the real world, this story
underlines the need to look at total credit, and to analyse the monetary data with finesse.

20

See Bank of England Inflation Report, November 2007, Section 1 on “Money and Asset Prices”, pages 16-17.

8

BIS Review 149/2007

It cannot be ruled out that, for a while, the M4L growth rate may deceive as to the underlying
pace of credit expansion in the economy.
That is important because, in a nutshell, the turmoil in financial markets is not just a “City”
event. How potent it will be macroeconomically will depend on how long current conditions
persist, and the feedback loop between the financial economy and the real economy.
As to its persistence, necessary conditions for an alleviation of the current strains in credit
markets are probably at least twofold. First, that the US housing and household debt markets
stabilise. Second, that banks and other financial intermediaries recognise impairments to
asset values, so that uncertainties about counterparty credit risks begin to reduce.
On the financial-real economy interaction, we must try to avoid a vicious circle in which
tighter liquidity conditions, lower asset values, impaired capital resources, reduced credit
supply, and slower aggregate demand feed back on each other. A variety of policy
responses are possible. The announcement yesterday by central banks of co-ordinated
action via term auctions to alleviate pressure in financing markets is directed at that. Second,
regulatory authorities around the world are monitoring banks’ liquidity and capital positions,
including in the context of Basel II. And, thirdly, monetary policy also can in principle play a
role, through what is effectively a “financial accelerator” working through bank balance
sheets, where that is consistent with maintaining stable inflation in the medium term.
In the UK, the starting point has been robust domestic demand; the leveraged-buyout sector
aside, generally healthy corporate balance sheets; somewhat more vulnerable household
balance sheets; 21 and potentially stretched commercial and residential property prices.
At the Committee’s November meeting, I explored the case for an “insurance cut” addressed
to the downside risks from tightening credit conditions. The case for such a cut was
strengthened by Bank Rate, at 5¾%, standing at a level that was most probably mildly
restrictive. But that had to be weighed against the upward pressures on inflation stemming
largely from the rise in energy and other commodity prices. Our November projections
seemed to me likely to validate the expectation already embodied in the money market curve
that Bank Rate would over time be lowered, representing some offset to the tightening in
liquidity and credit premia. That being so, on balance, I concluded that an immediate cut was
not necessary; and that “no change” would give the Committee a valuable opportunity to
explain in the Inflation Report the implications of both the credit and commodity shocks,
underlining that the Committee remains focused on anchoring inflation expectations and so
achieving the inflation target over the medium term.
Looking ahead, I noted the importance of distinguishing between, on the one hand, the
passing through into the macroeconomy of the shocks that had already occurred to credit
conditions and to commodity prices; and, on the other hand, the possibility of new shocks on
either or both fronts.
That was my starting point for our December meeting, the minutes of which will be published
next week.
Summary and conclusions
Let me try to pull together some of my central themes.

21

“…households have increased their debt….more debt unavoidably leaves them more vulnerable to bad luck,
eg adverse economic shocks”, Tucker, P. M. W. (2003), “Credit conditions and monetary policy”, speech at
the Leeds Financial Services Initiative, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Autumn 2003, p. 373.

BIS Review 149/2007

9

I have stressed that we should take care to avoid talking about money when we mean credit.
In a similar spirit, we should be clear when we mean total credit and when bank lending, but
without assuming the two are divorced.
I have also stressed the need for attention to the underlying drivers of credit conditions
throughout the economic cycle. In today’s financial system, we may well need richer data on
credit quantities and flows outside the banking sector, perhaps along the lines of the US Flow
of Funds statistics. The Bank’s new Credit Conditions Survey is also designed to give us
better qualitative information to put alongside the quantity and price data. Even so, as with
asset prices more generally, we will sometimes find it hard to distinguish between changes in
credit conditions warranted by fundamentals and those that are not. Failure to recognise
fundamentally warranted and sustainable shifts would deplete welfare. But it is distinctly
uncomfortable for the world’s central banks to rely entirely on mopping up after a bubble
bursts: one imbalance can lead to another. 22 The central banking community does not yet
have a satisfactory way through this dilemma.
And Money? It occupies one end of the liquidity spectrum, and so changes in the quantity of
money might potentially affect risk premia, and so credit conditions more generally. Gauging
that is a formidable challenge. As an input to policy, there is just no alternative to getting
one’s hands dirty in analysing the monetary data. With an institutional rather than functional
definition of broad money, special care is needed not to be misled by shifts in the demand for
money from the plethora of non-bank financial institutions. This is important if we are to use
money as an indicator of nominal trends alongside survey and financial-market-based
measures of inflation expectations.
That brings me back to where I began: with our policy reaction function. Occasionally the
markets will be surprised by our policy decisions. But we should do all we can to avoid
confusion about how we think about the economy and about monetary policy strategy. In the
spring, my own view of the signals from broad money had not altered materially. So today I
have tried to explain how I think about money, credit and the connections between them.
That has provided a framework for some observations on the current conjuncture,
underlining the need for careful attention to conditions in the banking system. Central banks
should be, and need to be, well placed to undertake that analysis, which has rarely been
more important than now.

22

10

I argued this in Tucker, P. M. W. (2006), “Reflections on operating inflation targeting”, speech at the Chicago
Graduate School of Business, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2006, p. 220.

BIS Review 149/2007

ANNEX
Chart 1: Money mentions(a) in MPC
minutes and money growth
M entions

6m-o-6m (ann)
M oney mentions

2
1.8
1.6

14

M 4 growth

iloan
D(2)

CD(3)

C

12

CS(1)

CD(1)

10

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1997

Diagram A: Shifts in both supply of
credit (CS(1)→ CS(2)) and demand for
credit (CD(1)→ CD(2)/ CD(3))

8
6

il(2)
il(1)

CS(2)
F

A

E

il(2)

4
2

1999

2001

2003

0
2007

2005

C1

C3Credit

C2

Note: (a) number of mentions on “money” in
“Immediate policy decision” section of MPC Minutes
Source: Bank of England

Diagram B: Shift in supply of credit
(CS(1)→ CS(2)), unchanged demand (CD)

Chart 2: Total credit to UK households

iloan

£ billions
1600

CD

1400

Total lending to individuals

1200

CS(1)

1000

A

il(1)

B

800

CS(2)

600

il(2)

400
Bank and building society credit

200
0

C1

Credit

C2

1987

1991

1995

1999

2003

2007

Source: Bank of England, ONS

Chart 3: Total credit to UK private nonfinancial companies
£ billions
4000

Chart 4: Shares of total lending to UK
households
Percentage of total
lending to households

Non-bank lending
Bank lending

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

3500
3000

Total financial
liabilities

2500
2000

Total lending to
PNFCs

1500
1000

PNFCs' M4L
500
0
1987

1991

1995

1999

Source: Bank of England, ONS

BIS Review 149/2007

2003

2007

1993

1997

2001

2005

Source: Bank of England, ONS.

11

Chart 5: Securitisations relative to
stock of M4 lending

Chart 6: UK household sector assetbacked security spreads
Bas is points

Percentage of sectoral M4L stock
25

400

20

300

350

Basis points

Commercial mortgages
Credit cards
Prime mortgages
Non-conforming mortgages (LHS)

150
120

250

Household secured
15

90

200
60

150

10

Household unsecurd

0
2002

0
98

99

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: LehmansLive
Note: weighted averages of AAA, AA, A and BBB 5years spreads for prime and commercial mortgages
and of AAA, A and BBB 5-year spreads fro credit
cards and non-confirming mortgages.

Source: Bank of England

Chart 7: Spread of effective mortgage
and personal loan rates (new business)
to Bank Rate
P ersonal loans

30

50

5

PNFCs

100

Chart 8: UK corporate bond spreads

Per cent
6

Basis P oint s
1200
Non-invest ment grade

5

M ortgages

1000

4

800

3

600

2

400
Invest ment grade

1

200

0
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

0
1998

Source: Bank of England

2000

2002

2004

2006

Source: Bloomberg, Bank of England

Chart 9: Decomposition of UK noninvestment grade corporate bond
spreads

Chart 10: Issuance of UK residential
mortgage-backed securities

Basis point s

Residual including liquidit y
Uncert aint y about default loss
Expect ed default loss

£ blns
60

1000
Actu al

50

800

40
600

30
400

`

20
200

10

0

0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

-200
1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

Source: Dealogic

Source: Bloomberg, Bank of England

12

BIS Review 149/2007

Chart 11: Gross corporate bond
issuance by UK private non-financial
companies (all currencies)

Chart 12: Basis between credit spreads
on bonds and credit default swaps

£, billions
12

basis point s
150

10

100
Europe

8

50

6

0

4

-50
-100

2

US
-150

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

-200

2007

-250

Source: Bank of England
Jan.

Apr.

Jul.

Oct .

Jan.

Apr.

Jul.

Oct .

Source: JP Morgan Chase & Co and Merrill Lynch.
(a) The difference between: US CDX crossover index and
a BB rated US corporate bond index; and European
iTraxx crossover index and a European BB-B rated
corporate bond index. This is because the iTraxx
crossover index has a lower average rating than the CDX
crossover.

Chart 13: Global capital issuance by
tier
$ billions

Lower T 2

50

Upper T 2

40

T 1 (incl hybrid capit al)

30
20
10
0
Jan May Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep
2005

2006

2007

Source: Dealogic

Chart 14: UK mortgage approvals
Top 5 banks by market capitalisation
O ther banks and lenders
Building societies

2001

2003

Source: Bank of England

BIS Review 149/2007

2005

Thousands
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2007

Chart 15: UK net secured lending to
households
Top 5 banks by market capitalisation
O ther banks and lenders
Building societies

£ millions
8000

6000

4000

2000

0
2001

2003

2005

2007

Source: Bank of England

13

Diagram C: Shifts in supply of credit
(CS(1)→ CS(2)) and money supply
iloan
CD
CS(1)
A

il(1)

B

CS(2)

il(2)

C1

Credit

C2

iwholesale
M

MS(1)

D

MS(1)

A’

iw(1)

B’

iw(2)

M1

Money

M2

Chart 16: Lenders’ margins on UK mortgages
Basis point s
140

Basis point s
600
P ersonal loans (RHS)

120

500

100

400

80
60

300

Mort gages (LHS)

200

40

100

20
0
1999

0
2001

2003

2005

2007

Source: Bank of England
Note: spreads of effective rates on stocks of lending over appropriate funding costs.

14

BIS Review 149/2007

Chart 17: UK wholesale M4 growth

Chart 18: 10-year rolling averages of
UK broad money growth and inflation

% change on a year ago

% average annual growth
20

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
1987

1990

1993

1996

Source: Bank of England

BIS Review 149/2007

1999

2002

Broad money
15
10
5

CPI

0
1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2005

-5

Source: Capie, F and Webber, A (1985), “A
monetary history of the United Kingdom, 18701982”, and ONS.

15

John Gieve: The impact of the financial market disruption on the UK
economy
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the London Chamber
of Commerce and Industry, London, 17 January 2008.
*

*

*

Introduction
These are testing times for the MPC.
The latest official figures for growth confirm the strength of the economy in Q3 with above
trend growth in domestic demand and a growing current account deficit. But the evidence
from surveys and other timely indicators is that growth is slowing quite sharply now, in part
because of the rises in interest rates last year. That in itself might justify a progressive shift in
policy – from restrictive to a more neutral stance. And the case for easing has been greatly
strengthened by the disruption in global credit markets and in our own banking system which
brings a risk of a deeper downturn.
However we have also seen a big rise in the world prices of oil and food. That is being
amplified in the UK by a fall in sterling and is now coming through in our food, petrol, gas and
electricity prices. These are likely to raise our inflation rate well above target in the coming
months at a time when short term inflation expectations remain uncomfortably high.
This combination of upside and downside risks complicates our task of keeping inflation on
track to meet the 2% target.
Financial market disruption
The disruption of credit and money markets was set off by a deterioration in the US subprime housing market. This started to show up in increasing provisions in the 2006 accounts
of banks which held them on balance sheet in a traditional way. But impairment charges of
that sort would not have occasioned such ferment in international markets. That was the
result of the impact on the new markets for structured credit such as Collateralised Debt
Obligations (CDO’s) 1 (Chart 1), which had developed to meet investors’ demand for higher
yield. As forecasts of US sub-prime defaults mounted, it became clear that such products
had introduced opacity and uncertainty into both the distribution and scale of losses.
The crisis played itself out in number of “lurches”, which were reflected in the movements in
the ABX indices 2 (Chart 2):
•

Although the problems of the sub-prime market were obvious in mid-2006, it wasn’t
until January/February 2007 that the rising defaults led to mark downs in indices
valuing the riskier tranches of the structured products and difficulties at a number of
US sub-prime originators;

1

Collateralised Debt Obligations are securities backed by a portfolio of fixed-income assets that are issued in
tranches of varying seniority. As default losses accrue to the underlying portfolio they are applied to
the securities in reverse order of seniority. The main types of CDOs are those based on portfolios of leveraged
bank loans (CLOs) and asset-backed securities (ABS CDOs).

2

The ABX indices are baskets of 20 credit default swaps that provide insurance against default losses on
securities of a given rating and vintage of issuance that are backed by home equity loans. The home equity
loan category comprises mainly of sub-prime first mortgages, but also second mortgages, mortgages with high
loan-to-value ratios and home equity lines of credit

BIS Review 7/2008

1

•

in June, as losses began to appear in highly-rated tranches of so-called mezzanine
CDOs, two heavily exposed Bear Stearns hedge funds collapsed; the rating
agencies began to review their methodologies and started to downgrade securities,
some by several notches;

•

at the end of July, a SIV 3 sponsored by IKB reported losses on sub-prime mortgage
exposures and failed to raise funding in the commercial paper market, and in early
August BNP Paribas temporarily suspended redemptions from a number of money
market funds because of valuation problems; this provoked an “investors” strike’ on
mortgage-backed securities and the commercial paper that funded off-balance sheet
vehicles holding them; in turn this led banks to hoard liquidity against potential calls
on their committed lines, to a marked tightening of inter-bank markets and funding
pressures on banks, including, of course, Northern Rock;

•

after a brief lull in October, renewed doubts about the scale of the losses in the big
international banks led to concerns about counterparty risk and sparked a renewed
squeeze in the money markets with LIBOR spreads climbing back to levels
experienced in August.

There are many lessons for markets and the authorities from this turmoil. First it underlined
the critical importance of liquidity in managing and regulating banks. Second it showed up
the limitations of the models which underpin the valuation and rating of structured products
and the excessive weight that had been given to them not just by the naive or unwary, but by
some of the most sophisticated players in financial markets (including many of the
sponsoring banks who underestimated the risks they were running in retaining super senior
tranches). Third, it illuminated the adverse incentives that had been allowed to develop in the
distribution chain for credit products including the strong incentives for originators to put
quantity above quality, for the rating agencies to expand their scope as widely as possible,
and for banks to use off-balance-sheet vehicles to finance structured credits. It may also
reveal some flaws in the compensation schemes in banks. In some cases these incentives
arose despite regulation, in others they were the consequence of faults in the regulatory
system. Finally it showed again how measures of risk used by companies and regulators can
be pro-cyclical, encouraging more risk taking at the top of the cycle and potentially
exacerbating the downswing.
In the last few weeks, markets have been calmer. Liquidity pressures in short-term funding
markets have eased, helped in part by the co-ordinated action by central banks to address
elevated funding rates over the year end (Chart 3). And, as losses have been declared it has
proved possible for a number of firms such as UBS, Merrill Lynch and Citigroup to attract
new capital including from Sovereign Wealth Funds.
It is too early to declare the problem solved. The longer term bank funding markets remain
relatively illiquid, many securitisation markets remain effectively closed (Chart 4), and
general market sentiment remains fragile. Only a part of the total losses on sub-prime have
yet been declared and not all the questions about the future of SIVs or the capitalisation of
monoline insurers have yet been answered. The sub-prime chapter will not be closed for
some months yet and there are still risks of re-ignition of the acute money market conditions
we saw last month.
But there are grounds for hope that we are reaching the end of the beginning at least and
that the key challenge is moving from stabilising the financial markets themselves to dealing
with the impact on the wider economy.

3

2

Structured investment vehicles are funds that issue short-term securities in order to invest in longer-term
securities. The latter have typically comprised mainly of mortgage-backed securities and other asset-backed
securities. Banks sponsored SIVs are managed by banks.

BIS Review 7/2008

Macroeconomic impact
Judging that impact is not easy. Banking crises have typically reflected macroeconomic
difficulties at home. Banks have lent too much and too cheaply at the top of the cycle and
have then suffered from defaults when policy tightened and unemployment and failures
increased. The most recent example in the UK banking sector was during the recession of
the early 1990s when the major banks wrote off about 2.5%of their domestic loan book and
tightened credit conditions, thus exacerbating the fall in property prices and in confidence. It
has been estimated that the effect of the tightening of credit conditions was to reduce UK
output in 1991 by almost 2% relative to what it would otherwise have been. 4 Of course, there
was little monetary policy could do at that time to offset these effects because of Sterling’s
ERM membership.
But the current crisis does not follow that pattern. It has come at a time when the
performance of the UK economy has been unusually good. Over the past fifteen years the
economy has experienced the most stable macroeconomic conditions on record with steady
growth, low inflation and a declining trend in unemployment. 5 For the most part the
underlying balance sheet position of households and firms is robust and most indicators of
financial fragility such as mortgage arrears, repossessions and corporate insolvencies are at
low levels (Chart 5).
So the question is whether we can reverse into macroeconomic trouble starting from a
banking crisis with its origins in the US housing market. Of course a marked slowdown in the
US will diminish directly part of our exports. But two domestic transmission channels to
consumption and investment will determine the size of the overall impact on our economy:
•

the effects of credit constraints; and

•

impact on expectations and confidence.

Credit constraints
With their own funding rates increasing and a reduction in their ability to distribute risk
through securitisation, there is now clear evidence that UK lenders have begun to tighten
lending conditions for households and firms. The Bank’s Credit Conditions Survey (CCS) of
major UK lenders has identified a change in behaviour since the summer. 6 Contrary to earlier
expectations, lenders reported that the availability of secured credit to households had
reduced noticeably over the three months to mid-December (Chart 6). Corporate credit
availability was also reported to have been reduced significantly over the same period. A
further reduction in the general availability of credit was expected over the next three months.
The survey suggests that lenders are both raising the price of borrowing and reducing the
range of people and firms they are prepared to lend to. There has been a pick up in the
average spread of quoted mortgage rates over the appropriate funding rate in recent months
(Chart 7). There has also been a fall in the number of mortgage products available for creditimpaired borrowers (Chart 8).
The first impact of the tightening in secured credit conditions is being felt in the property
markets and lower demand for assets but there will also be direct effects on activity.
Although only a minority of households may be credit constrained they are probably sufficient

4

Young, G (1996), “The influence of financial intermediaries on the behaviour of the UK economy”, NIESR
Occasional Paper No 50.

5

This is discussed in detail in the Bank’s memorandum to the House of Commons Treasury Committee’s
inquiry into “The Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England: ten years on”, Quarterly Bulletin, 47(1),
2007Q1, 24- 38.

6

Credit Conditions Survey, http://externalboeweb/publications/other/monetary/creditconditions.htm

BIS Review 7/2008

3

in number to depress household spending somewhat, possibly reversing a little of the decline
in the saving ratio seen since the early 1990s (Chart 9). In a similar way a tightening of
corporate lending conditions will affect some companies’ investment. The Deloitte CFO
survey taken in early December finds that 20% of firms expect the recent credit market
events to have a negative impact on their capital spending in 2008. 7
This tightening of credit conditions would be exacerbated by any further weakening in the
financial position of banks due to a slowdown in the wider economy. Slower growth and a
rise in unemployment in particular would lead to higher loan defaults. There are signs that
this is already happening in consumer lending in the US. Weakening property prices would
reduce the amount that lenders could realise in the event of default. With pressures on their
capital and new capital expensive where it is available, banks are likely to attempt to
increase their margins and to slow down new lending, thereby reducing their capital
requirements, for example by tightening non-price terms and conditions on new loans.
One factor which regulators are watching carefully at present is the impact of the shift this
month to the Basle II system of capital requirements for European banks. While Basle II
improves on its predecessor and removes many undesirable incentives, it retains some
procyclical features and any transition needs to be managed carefully. 8
The impact on expectations and confidence
The other channel by which the financial market turbulence is likely to have macroeconomic
effects is by prompting more cautious behaviour by households and firms. This might simply
reflect uncertainty about the future. Firms may temporarily postpone investment because of
greater uncertainty about the future path of demand. We saw an effect like this after 9/11 for
example. But it might also reflect a revision by households and firms about the sustainable
path of income and wealth in the coming years. The change in expectations may reflect the
higher costs of borrowing and a higher risk of unemployment.
Again a reduction in confidence about future growth may lead directly to lower consumption
and investment. It is also likely to affect equity and property markets. Potential buyers may
decide to wait before purchasing if they sense that there is a chance that prices may fall.
Such behaviour can be self-fulfilling.
There is no doubt that the housing market has been weakening significantly in recent months
and the trend is more advanced still in commercial property markets where prices are falling
rapidly. It is widely assumed that weakening property prices will also depress consumption.
The Bank has tended to be sceptical of this mechanism. 9 While property prices and spending
tend to move together, that doesn’t prove that one causes the other. Both may result from
changes in income and expectations of future income. 10 Indeed, in the same way as you
can’t have your cake and eat it, it is not clear that a general increase in house prices does
create extra spending power for the population as a whole. Owners who expect to remain in
their current house for a long time cannot also spend their housing wealth and the benefits to
those trading down are broadly offset by the costs to those trading up. While older owners
may be richer and believe they can support a more expensive lifestyle, the rise in prices will
show through in higher rents and larger deposits for those wanting to get on the ladder.

7

The Deloitte CFO Survey: Benchmarking Corporate Financial Attitudes, 4 January 2008.

8

Benford, J and Nier, E (2007), “Monitoring cyclicality of Basel II Capital Requirements”, Financial Stability
Paper No. 3 (December 2007), Bank of England.

9

This view is discussed fully in Benito, A, Thompson, J, Waldron, M, and Wood, R (2006), “House prices and
consumer spending”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer, pp. 142-154.

10

Some household level evidence for this view is given by Attanasio, O, Blow, L, Hamilton, R, and Leicester, A
(2005), “Consumption, house prices and expectation”, Bank of England Working Paper No. 271.

4

BIS Review 7/2008

But even if there is not a strong causal connection between house prices and consumption
through a wealth channel, there may nevertheless be a significant collateral channel. When
house prices fall, the amount of housing equity and hence collateral at homeowners’ disposal
decreases. This will tend to delay spending as lenders are willing to lend less or lend on less
favourable terms to those who have little or no housing equity. That channel should have
become less important in recent years. This is because most homeowners have substantial
equity in their homes which would not be materially affected by relatively modest changes in
house prices. 11 This may help to account for a decline in the correlation between real house
price growth and consumption since the beginning of the decade (Chart 10).
An analogous collateral channel may operate in the corporate sector. Declines in commercial
property prices will weaken corporate balance sheets and this could affect corporate
spending if lenders raise the cost of borrowing to affected companies. This effect is likely to
be particularly pronounced among commercial real estate companies.
Inflation and energy prices
In these ways the losses in credit markets are already contributing to slowing growth; the
questions are by how much and for how long? The danger that they could turn a necessary
modest slowdown into a deeper and more painful downturn is clear and, of course, that
would dampen inflationary pressures. That was a key factor in my decision to vote for a cut in
rates in November and December.
But the current situation is complicated by emerging upside pressures on prices. This
inflationary pressure is coming largely from outside the UK, reflecting in part increased
demand from countries like China where output growth has been both rapid and commodity
intensive. That has led to renewed strength in commodity prices (Chart 11), with oil rising as
high as $100 a barrel and some agricultural foods reaching record highs in dollar terms. This
has already increased the prices of imported goods, and that effect has been amplified
recently by the fall in sterling. In turn, it is putting upward pressure on the sterling prices set
by domestic producers for crude oil and wholesale gas and electricity. And, in contrast to the
past, demand from emerging economies may mean that commodity prices prove resilient to
slowing growth in the industrialised economies.
The appropriate monetary policy reaction to upside pressures on prices coming from outside
the economy (such as an energy price shock) depends on how households and businesses
react to that shock – in other words, on so-called “second-round” effects. A key determinant
of those effects will be the impact on inflation expectations. If households’ and businesses’
expectations of future inflation rise following the initial price shock, pressures for
compensating rises in wages and prices are much more likely. Inflation expectations are
difficult to measure, but surveys of households’ expectations have picked up since early
2005 (Chart 12). This partly reflects the rise in inflation during 2005-06. But expectations
have remained elevated during 2007 despite the easing in inflation in the second half of the
year.
Conclusion
After a long period of stability, we have experienced a major financial shock that has
reverberated through the banking sector in all the advanced economies. It has calmed
recently, but we should expect a prolonged period of discomfort for individual banks and the
financial system as a whole. Unusually, this shock was not the result of bad loans at home

11

Evidence on housing equity is presented in Waldron, M and Young, Y (2006), “Household debt and spending:
results from the 2007 NMG Research survey”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Winter, pp. 512-21.

BIS Review 7/2008

5

but it will have an impact on growth through tighter credit constraints and by influencing
expectations and confidence. We cannot be sure how large those effects will be but they
pose a serious downside risk to growth. To make matters more difficult, we face a sharp rise
in inflation in coming months as a result of rising commodity prices worldwide and a fall in our
exchange rate.
In reaching our decisions, the MPC always looks not just at the central projection for the
economy but at the risks on either side. That will require not just difficult judgements but
careful explanation in the months ahead.

Chart 1: ABS CDO issuance

Chart 2: Prices of US sub-prime mortgage
credit default swaps(a)
$ billion
225

CDO^2

200

Mezz ABS CDO

175

HG ABS CDO

150

US$
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Jan
2008

125

AAA
AA
A
BBB
BBB-

100
75
50
25

Jan
2007

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

0

Apr

Jul

Oct

Source: Citi

Source: Bank calculations.
(a) ABX.HE 2006 H2. Each index references 20 home equity
loan (HEL) ABS of indicated rating issued in 2006 H1. Subprime loans form the vast majority of the collateral backing
HEL ABS.

Chart 3: 3-month LIBOR spreads over
expected policy rates

Chart 4: RMBS issuance by all UK resident
issuers

Basis points

£ blns
(three month rolling sum)
60

120

(b)
Sterling

100

50

US dollar
80

Euro

40

60

30

40

20
10

20

0
0
Apr
2007

Jul

Oct

Source: Bloomberg.
(a) 3-month LIBOR spreads over 3-month overnight index
swap (OIS) rates.
(b) Coordinated central bank measures announced (12th

6

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Jan
2008

Source: Dealogic. Data to end-December 2007

BIS Review 7/2008

Dec 2007).

BIS Review 7/2008

7

Chart 5: Mortgage arrears and possessions
rates

Chart 6: Household secured and corporate
credit availability
Net percentage balances(a) Easier
credit
30
Corporate
20

Percentage greater than 3 months in arrears

Percent

Household
Secured

7

0.9
0.8

6

10

0.7
5

0.6

0

4

0.5
0.4

-10
-20

3

Possessions (LHS)

-30

0.3

2

0.2

Arrears (RHS)

1

0.1
0
1990

-40
-50
-60

0
1993

1995

1998

2001

2004

2006

Source: CML
Back cast data before 1994

Tighter
credit

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Reported change, past three months
Expected change, next three months
Source: Bank of England Credit Conditions Survey

Chart 7: Quoted mortgage spreads

Chart 8: Mortgage product availability
(a)

Thousands

Basis point spread to funding rate
250
SVR

Credit impaired
Prime

200
150

Bank Rate Tracker
100

5 yr fixed

50
0
2 yr fixed
-50
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: Bank of England.
(a) SVR mortgages spread over one month lag of Bank
Rate; Tracker mortgages spread over Bank Rate; 2 yr, and
5 yr fixed rate mortgages spread over one month lag of 2
and 5 year swap rates.

8

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Feb Mar AprMay Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec End
Dec
Source: MoneyFacts.

BIS Review 7/2008

Chart 9: Household saving ratio

Chart 10: Correlation between growth in house
prices and consumption
Rolling ten-year correlation coefficient between real
annual house price inflation and consumption growth

16%
14%

1.0
0.9
0.8

12%

0.7

10%

0.6

8%

0.5
0.4

6%

0.3
0.2

4%

0.1

2%

0.0

0%
1970 1975

1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996 2001 2006

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

Source: ONS

Source: Bank calculations.

Chart 11: Commodity prices

Chart 12: General public inflation expectations

US dollars per barrel
Index, 2000=100
120
350
Economist food index (rhs)
100

Economist metals index (rhs)

300

Brent oil spot prices (lhs)

250

80

3.2
Bank/NOP

3.0
2.8
2.6

200

2.4

60
40
20

150

2.2

100

2.0

50

1.8

0
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Source: datastream and bank calculations

BIS Review 7/2008

1.6
Feb00

Feb01

Feb02

Feb- Feb03
04

Feb05

Feb06

Feb07

Source: Bank of England/NOP public attitudes to inflation
survey.

9

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at a dinner hosted by the IoD
South West and the CBI, Bristol, 22 January 2008.
*

*

*

It is four months since Northern Rock came to the Bank of England for support. And the
headlines continue to be dominated by its fate. Northern Rock, however, is not the epicentre
of the present global banking crisis. That lies in the very substantial losses made by many
banks in the main financial centres as a result of the collapse of the US sub-prime mortgage
market.
Those losses, and the fear of future losses on a wider range of loans, pose a threat to the
ability of the banking system to finance continued economic growth – the so-called credit
crunch. Concerns about the implications of a credit crunch, not only for the health of the US
but for the world economy, lie behind the sharp falls in global equity markets over the past
week. So the next year will pose economic challenges for all of us – more so than at any time
since the Bank of England was given its independence in 1997.
Both industrialised and emerging market economies have been affected by the fall in asset
prices but conditions vary across countries. It is striking that the banking crisis originated at
the heart of the world’s major financial centres. And the country most severely affected is the
United States where the Federal Reserve today cut interest rates by 75 basis points – the
largest reduction since August 1982 – to mitigate “increasing downside risks to growth”. The
contraction in the US housing market has deepened and unemployment there is rising.
I want tonight to explain the nature of the challenges facing us and why many of them
originate outside our shores. Exactly five hundred years before the Bank of England was
given its independence, an Italian migrant who had made his home in Bristol, Giovanni
Caboto, or John Cabot as he was known, set sail from this great city in May 1497 and
became the first European to land on the North American mainland since the Vikings. A
seafaring voyage like Cabot’s is a good analogy for the challenges facing the British
economy, which will have to navigate some distinctly choppy waters in 2008.
The challenge to the Monetary Policy Committee’s ability to navigate our way through the
next year reflects two strong economic winds; one from the west and one from the east. They
correspond to what economists call demand and supply shocks. The former is the credit
crunch which has blown across the Atlantic, and threatens a sharp slowing in output growth.
The latter is the rise in energy and food prices, reflecting continued strong growth in Asia,
that, together with rising import prices, threaten to lift inflation noticeably above target in the
coming months. These two winds have stirred up the water through which the UK economy
must pass.
The westerly gale first hit us in August as developments in the US mortgage market led to
turmoil in global financial markets. For some years, banks were able to borrow cheaply in
world capital markets to expand their lending. They packaged the resulting loans and sold
assets backed by those loans to capital market investors. They were able to do that because
some investors had failed to adjust to lower rates of return caused by high savings in
emerging economies and low inflation at home. Those investors engaged in a “search for
yield” by buying risky assets without always understanding fully the risks attached to them.
Families and businesses had access to more finance at lower cost. That was most obvious in
the growth of the US sub-prime mortgage market, where the potential problem of lending to
people who could not repay when the interest rate was reset on their floating rate mortgages
was becoming only too clear. In the United Kingdom too, borrowing and spending growth
were strong and inflationary pressures built up.

BIS Review 8/2008

1

But in August all that changed dramatically. Rising default rates in the US mortgage market
led investors around the world to question whether they were being adequately compensated
for the risks they were bearing on a wide range of assets – not just those associated with
sub-prime mortgages. The prices of those assets fell, and markets closed for a range of
complex credit instruments.
As I said two years ago, “risk premia have become unusually compressed and the expansion
of money and credit may have encouraged investors to take on more risk than hitherto
without demanding a higher return. It is questionable whether such behaviour can persist”.
And, as we have seen, it hasn’t. The re-pricing of risk that is still continuing is not a process
that we should try to reverse.
Adjustment to this has been painful for banks in the major financial centres in two ways. First,
with some asset markets closed, banks found funding more difficult. Some needed to finance
loans they had made but had then expected to package up and sell. Others needed to
finance off-balance sheet investment vehicles that were no longer able to fund themselves.
At the outset of the crisis, banks were concerned to protect their liquidity position. But
increasingly, attention has turned to a second, more fundamental concern. As a range of
asset prices fell, banks began to report large losses. Uncertainty about the scale and location
of losses led to concerns about the adequacy of bank capital and hence the ability of the
banking system to finance continued economic expansion. At the end of last year, sentiment
in financial markets worsened markedly. So in mid-December, central banks around the
world announced a co-ordinated set of actions in money markets. These were designed to
boost confidence by demonstrating that we were conscious of the risks of a credit crunch.
Since those actions, conditions in money markets have eased considerably. The benchmark
3-month interbank lending rate has fallen by around 75 basis points relative to expected
policy rates. But conditions are not yet back to normal and remain fragile. Although central
banks can and will respond to the consequences of strains in the banking system for their
economies, the solution to the underlying problem does not rest with them but with the banks
and financial markets themselves. Banks must reveal losses promptly, and, most importantly,
raise new capital where necessary.
But these developments in financial markets and the banking system have started to affect
activity in the economy more widely. Interest rates charged to both households and
companies have risen relative to Bank Rate, reversing the relative fall in the year or so
before last August. And our own survey of credit conditions last month revealed that lenders
intend to tighten conditions further this year. This tightening is unlikely to be short-lived.
Tighter conditions will discourage borrowing to finance spending on residential and
commercial property, on business investment and on consumption. The impact on property
prices is already clearly visible. Commercial property prices have fallen by 12% since the
middle of last year. And, after rising sharply earlier in 2007, house prices stagnated in the
final quarter. Although there is a considerable stock of equity in owner-occupied housing,
with banks tightening the supply of both secured and unsecured credit, consumers will find it
more difficult to borrow to finance spending. So in 2008 it is likely that a less buoyant housing
market will go hand in hand with slower growth of consumer spending.
Tighter credit conditions mean that, as a nation, we are likely to save more of our income this
year than in the recent past. In the short run, that will slow economic activity, possibly quite
sharply. And there is a risk that weaker activity and lower asset prices could result in another
round of losses for banks and a further tightening of credit conditions.
The adjustment which not only the British but the world economy is experiencing is
necessary as the imbalances, between spending and saving and between domestic demand
and trade, unwind. As part of a longer-run rebalancing of the UK economy, an increase in our
national saving rate, both private and public, is necessary. The low level of national saving is
apparent from the current account deficit – our new net borrowing from overseas – which in

2

BIS Review 8/2008

the third quarter of last year was, relative to GDP, the biggest in the past fifty years and the
largest in the G7. It is possible to run a current account deficit for a considerable period.
Australia, for example, has done so in every year since 1974. But our own position is
becoming more difficult. For some years we have been able to finance current account
deficits by borrowing, often through banks, at unusually low interest rates on world capital
markets. Such borrowing is now becoming more expensive. Unless we spend less and save
more, our current account position will deteriorate.
If we are to raise our national saving rate without overall demand, output and employment
suffering in the medium term, we will need to export more and import less. Such a
rebalancing is helped by the fall in sterling’s effective exchange rate. Sterling has fallen,
against a trade-weighted basket of currencies by almost 10% since August. And financial
markets are pricing in a significant probability of a further decline in the exchange rate during
this year.
A lower average level of the exchange rate can, by supporting overall economic activity, help
protect us from the worst effects of the wind blowing across the Atlantic. But, by pushing up
import prices, it will exacerbate the impact of the other wind now buffeting the UK economy,
which comes from the east – the inflationary effect of higher energy and food prices. Strong
growth of demand, particularly from China, India and other emerging markets in Asia, has
been a key driver of the sustained rises in commodity prices over recent years, most notably
oil prices.
Inflation has picked up in the industrialised world. It is now 3.1% in the euro area and 4.1% in
the United States. And although consumer price inflation here is close to target at 2.1%,
three developments now threaten to push it significantly above target this year. First, oil
prices are around $90 a barrel, although they have fallen back in recent days. In August, the
price was $70. Second, oil price increases have been accompanied by rising gas prices in
wholesale markets. And this month we have seen announcements from suppliers of
increases in household gas and electricity bills of the order of 15%. Third, world food prices
have risen sharply as a result of strong demand growth on the one hand and poor harvests
from South Australia to North Carolina on the other. Food prices on world markets are a third
higher than they were six months ago, and that has been feeding through to prices in the
shops. Food price inflation in our own Consumer Price Index reached almost 6% in
December.
So 2008 is likely to see higher energy prices, higher food prices and, with a lower exchange
rate, higher import prices, pushing inflation above the 2% target. It is possible that inflation
could rise to the level at which I would need to write an open letter of explanation, possibly
more than one, to the Chancellor. Although there is little we can do now to avoid some rise in
inflation this year, the task of the Monetary Policy Committee is to ensure that it is short-lived.
If inflation expectations were to pick up in the wake of a rise in inflation this year, then only a
more prolonged slowdown would allow inflation to return to target. But if the rise in inflation
does not affect longer-term expectations, then inflation could start to fall back towards the
end of the year.
We are determined to keep inflation on track to meet the 2% target in the medium term.
When the Monetary Policy Committee sets Bank Rate, it has to balance the risk that a sharp
slowing in activity, by creating a margin of spare capacity, would pull inflation below the
target, against the risk that, without such a margin of spare capacity, higher inflation in the
short term might have a tendency to persist. So we face a difficult balancing act in the course
of 2008. But we start the year from a position in which Bank Rate, at 5.5%, is probably
bearing down on demand.
After a decade and more of a non-inflationary consistently expansionary (nice) economy, a
phrase I coined in 2003, we moved to a somewhat bumpier but still rather stable path, which
I described the following year as the not-so-bad period. You might think we have now

BIS Review 8/2008

3

entered a not-so-good period. To put it bluntly, this year we are probably facing a period of
above target inflation and a marked slowing in growth.
Although we have little control over the strength of the economic winds buffeting our
economy, our framework of inflation targeting does, as I said in my first speech as Governor
almost five years ago, provide a seaworthy vessel. We cannot avoid some volatility in the
short run and it is important that everyone understands the limits to the ability of central
banks to smooth the economy. But, by keeping our eye firmly on the need to keep inflation
close to target in the medium term, we can reach the calmer waters of low inflation, steady
growth and a better balanced economy. And our policy framework will, I hope, allow you not
to be overwhelmed by the headlines and to focus on what really matters for our future
prosperity – the successful running of your own businesses.

4

BIS Review 8/2008

Rachel Lomax: The state of the economy
Speech by Ms Rachel Lomax, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Institute of
Economic Affairs 25th Anniversary Conference, London, 26 February 2008.
I am grateful to Gareth Ramsay for his help in preparing this speech, and to other colleagues at the Bank of
England for helpful comments.

*

*

*

When you met for this event a year ago, the UK economy had just posted its fastest rate of
growth in nearly two years, buoyed by a strong world economy and ample global liquidity.
Shoppers had been out in force over Christmas and the New Year, and the housing market
was booming. The main concern was consumer price inflation, which had just picked up to
3%. Most forecasters were looking forward to another year of healthy demand growth, with
the MPC’s central projection at the top end of the range. The consensus view was that the
surge in inflation would be short-lived.
And that, broadly, is what happened. CPI inflation fell back to around the 2% target by the
second half of the year. Output growth for the year as a whole was in line with the MPC’s
forecast. Short term interest rates now stand where they were a year ago – at 5.25% – after
briefly touching 5.75% last summer.
And yet the outlook for 2008 and beyond has changed dramatically. A year ago the prospect
was for a modest decrease in growth, consistent with inflation staying around target. Now,
inflation seems set to rise sharply in the near term. And our latest central projection is for
output to grow at below trend rates over the next two years – even on the conventional
assumption that Bank rate follows the market yield curve and falls to 4.5% during the course
of this year.
There is still relatively little in the headline macro data to support such a marked change in
view. CPI inflation, at 2.2%, remains close to target. And, on the output side, growth
weakened a touch in the fourth quarter last year, but was still around the post war average.
Indicators for the first quarter are mixed, but do not suggest that growth has stalled.
In other words, the change in our Inflation Report projections is a forecast. It is the judgments
underlying that forecast – and the attendant risks and uncertainties – which will be the main
focus of my remarks today.
So why have we changed our view?
Our latest forecasts reflect judgements about the possible future impact on the UK of two key
developments. First, the continuing financial crisis in advanced financial markets which has
been triggered by the slump in the US housing market; and second, the renewed build up in
global inflationary pressures, associated with soaring energy and food prices.
These developments are symptomatic of profound changes in the global economy, as world
growth has increasingly been powered by resource hungry emerging markets, and as
financial markets in developed countries have taken off and, in the process, become more
tightly linked to one another.
I will talk about both developments, before coming back to discuss the outlook for inflation
and growth in the UK, and the implications for policy.
Financial crisis
The crisis in financial markets last August was triggered by a slump in the US housing
market. This, of course, is acting as a direct drag on US activity. Any slowing in the US

BIS Review 22/2008

1

economy stands to affect the UK in the traditional way, through influencing trade flows. The
size of this effect will depend on how other trading partners are affected and how policymakers react.
But the really striking feature of recent experience has been how the US housing crisis has
reverberated through the highly integrated and sophisticated financial markets of North
America and Western Europe.
Six months after global securitisation markets seized up, in response to uncertainties about
the scale and location of losses arising from rising defaults on US sub prime mortgages,
some credit markets are still not trading at all, and others remain very illiquid. And each week
seems to highlight some new dimension of the ensuing disruption to core financial markets.
The crucial task of valuing and disclosing the impact of losses on core banking institutions is
still work in progress: important announcements are being made almost daily, and beyond
them lies the equally important task of repairing banks’ balance sheets. The current shortage
of liquidity makes the pricing of complex assets even more difficult. At the very least, this reinforces the need for transparency in providing estimates of losses, and descriptions of the
best-efforts processes used to produce these estimates.
The process of price discovery for many complex asset classes is unlikely to be completed
quickly. For assets directly related to US sub-prime, this is unlikely to be before the US
housing market stabilises. Other structured credit markets are likely to remain illiquid until
confidence in the banking sector has been restored, and large financial institutions are willing
to take more risk.
Clearly the situation is still developing. And its impact on the wider economic outlook – global
and domestic – will depend critically on what happens from now on. Here there are some
major uncertainties.
There is a widespread – and in my view largely correct – view that the US housing crisis
acted as the trigger for an overdue correction in financial markets, after a long period of
plentiful liquidity during which risk premia of all sorts had become unduly compressed, asset
prices had become detached from reality, financial innovation had run ahead of risk
management, and unsound business models had led to a deterioration in credit monitoring
and, in some areas, underlying credit quality.
Many people – including the Bank of England – foresaw that some form of correction in
financial markets was highly likely, even inevitable. But it was another matter altogether to
predict the precise nature and timing of the present crisis. The extent of the reverberations
across different markets was certainly not fully appreciated.
But the “accident waiting to happen” description of the current situation, however plausible at
a general level, lends itself to a wide range of predictions about the possible course of events
from now on, from the relatively benign to the frankly apocalyptic.
The interesting question is: where do we go from here?
Might slowdowns in other housing markets have the same potential to impair loan books and
dent overall growth as in the US? What is the likely impact of a further falls in global equity
markets? What further scope for amplifying financial shocks lies buried in the highly
leveraged and tightly interconnected world created by the heady pace of financial innovation
over the past decade? And – going to the apocalyptic end of the spectrum – if the global
macro economy does turn very sour, at what point might falling asset prices and mounting
banking losses start to feed on each other to push economies into a deflationary downward
spiral?
History does not give a clear steer. There have been financial and banking crises before, but
not on the present global scale, and this must surely be the largest ever peacetime liquidity
crisis. To take two extreme possibilities, is what we are seeing closer to a repeat of the US
Savings and Loans crisis (whose real economy impact was small and shallow) or to Japan in

2

BIS Review 22/2008

the early 1990s (characterised as a “lost decade” of growth)? Or is it something else again?
How much does it matter that this is one of the first crises where a credit boom has died of
“natural causes”, rather than being choked off by some external macroeconomic or policy
shock?
The substantial equity cushions built up in the years of plenty should act as shock absorbers
in the years ahead. Even the most pessimistic estimates of the total losses from sub-prime
mortgages – around $400 billion – compare with total global financial assets of at least $110
trillion1. But there may be more shocks to come. The focus of current concerns is how far
other assets may be impaired, as a result of the broader economic impact of this period of
financial stress.
This brings me to the other big uncertainty: how far will tighter credit conditions affect the
wider economy – in the UK and the rest of Europe as well as in North America? It seems
highly likely that growth was supported by easier credit over last few years. But to what
extent? When it comes to quantifying the effect of changes in credit conditions, our workhorse economic models still cannot help us very much.
As far as the UK economic outlook goes, our central judgement is that financial stress will act
as a significant drag on demand over the next two years. But there is a high level of
uncertainty about this; and, as we now see it, the risks, as they affect output, are tilted to the
downside. These are two fold: first, that the financial crisis will persist and possibly intensify;
and second, that over time tighter credit conditions and asset price weakness will combine,
and in the worst case feed off each other, to sap the strength of overall demand, and put
downward pressure on inflation in the medium term.
Higher costs
Let me come now to the other major area of risk: the upward pressure on inflation from
higher external costs.
The most recent build up of global cost pressures is just the latest episode in a remarkable
period of soaring commodity prices. Oil prices have more than trebled since the start of 2004,
and metals and food prices have more than doubled. Strong demand, particularly from China
has clearly been one major factor. But there have been supply side issues too. And the
strength of some commodity prices also reflects their status as an investment class at a time
of low global interest rates.
Over the past year alone, oil prices have risen by around 60% in dollar terms and agricultural
food prices by around 50%. Imported cost pressures in the UK will also reflect the fall in the
effective exchange rate, down by 9% since the beginning of August last year – the largest
such decline since sterling left the ERM in 1992. There are few reasons to expect this to be
rapidly reversed. As a result of these developments, producer input and output prices are
now increasing faster than at any time since 1990, and import prices have picked up sharply.
These cost pressures have not yet fed through fully into consumer prices, but from next
month CPI inflation is likely to rise more sharply, in particular reflecting the impact of higher
utility bills. There is essentially nothing the MPC can do about this immediate impact on the
inflation rate. But its implication for policy depends on whether people recognise the
temporary nature of the pick-up in inflation.
The MPC’s remit in setting interest rates is clear – to keep inflation at 2%. But we have
discretion to decide how fast to return inflation to target, if it is thrown off course by a sharp
shock, such as the current surge in world energy prices. So we are not required to raise

1

This estimate is taken from the Bank of England Financial Stability Report, October 2007, Box 1 (Mapping the
financial system). It comprises the estimates of total global securities markets, less bank deposits.

BIS Review 22/2008

3

interest rates sharply to counteract the rise in inflation which we expect over the next few
months. We can decide what is appropriate in the light of all the circumstances. And the
purpose of the Open Letter regime is to give us an opportunity to explain how we propose to
use our discretion.
Over the years the MPC has explained that it seeks to achieve its inflation objective in the
medium term by varying interest rates to steer overall demand relative to supply. If price and
wage setters do recognise that the imminent pick-up in inflation will be short-lived, then the
implications of the spike for monetary policy, and for the necessary balance of demand
versus supply, should be limited.
But if price and wage setters start to expect higher inflation to persist, then the Committee
will need to restrain demand, and so generate some slack in the economy, in order to bring
inflation expectations, and inflation itself, back down.
Clearly therefore it is a matter of intense interest to understand how people form and revise
their expectations.
Unfortunately our understanding is very incomplete. One relevant area of active research is
why inflation expectations seem to have been so stable over the past decade – the period of
the so-called Great Stability.
One supposition is that well anchored expectations reflect the introduction of credible
inflation targeting regimes – people have understood that central banks are focussed on
keeping inflation low, and will take action to reduce it if necessary. Another view is that
people’s expectations reflect simpler rules-of-thumb based on actual inflation rates: if that’s
the case stable expectations could simply be due to the fact that, over the past decade and a
half, inflation itself has been low and stable.
These alternatives are hard to distinguish empirically, on the track record so far. But it may
make a great deal of difference which is true when it comes to forecasting what will happen
to inflation expectations, if we have to deal with a future in which inflation is likely to be much
more variable.
If people put their trust in the regime, or a “credible central bank”, they are unlikely to revise
their expectations about future inflation much, especially if the nature of the current situation
is well and honestly explained, including how long it will take inflation to return to target. But if
they forecast future inflation using simple rules of thumb based on past actual inflation rates,
anything that dislodges inflation from target will affect what people use as their best forecast
for future inflation.
Or to put it another way, if the credibility of the monetary policy framework itself has been
key, then inflation expectations may prove rather resilient to short term shocks.
But if maintaining an excellent track record has been crucial, the situation may be more
fragile.
In the context of the current outlook, the real risk facing the Committee is that a further period
of above target inflation, prompted by a cost shock over which it has no immediate control,
will lead people to revise their expectations about future inflation, and to act accordingly. This
will make it more costly to bring inflation back to target.
What does all this mean for policy?
The MPC has frequently stressed that policy is not based simply on its central projections of
the economic outlook – what matter just as much are the risks around it. The Bank has
pioneered the use of fan charts to illustrate the probabilistic nature of any forecasting
exercise. The fact that these fan charts reflect the Committee’s subjective judgements about
the uncertainties it faces means that they can be quite revealing about its thinking.

4

BIS Review 22/2008

This is particularly true now. Policy needs to balance two significant risks – first, that financial
stress will precipitate an unduly sharp slowdown in demand, which will bear down so heavily
on inflation that it undershoots the target; and second, that temporarily high inflation will lead
to inflation expectations persisting at too high a level.
I find it helpful to distinguish between two aspects of uncertainty, both of which are relevant
to setting policy. First, the balance of risks around the central projection, and second the
general level of uncertainty.
The Committee regularly comments on the extent to which it believes the risks around the
central projection are skewed – that is, tilted to the upside or the downside. And it has
sometimes explained changes in interest rates by reference to changes in the balance of risk
rather than changes in the central projection. In the latest Inflation Report, we commented
that risks on our latest inflation forecasts were balanced, but those around the forecast for
output were tilted to the downside.
The width of the fan chart is an indication of the MPC’s level of uncertainty about the outlook.
It’s significant that the MPC widened the GDP fan charts in November, and the CPI fan
charts further out, and maintained these wider fans in February.
Another way of presenting the same information is this bar chart (conditioned on market
interest rates as in the February Inflation Report). This brings out the significant probabilities
ascribed to outcomes which are some way away from the central projections.
So, for example, there is a less than a one-in-three chance that GDP growth will be in the
range containing the Committee’s central projection – between 2 and 3% – in two years’
time. We see a greater probability – around two-in-five – that growth will be somewhere
below 2%. On inflation, there’s only around a one-in-four chance that inflation will lie close to
the central projection – that is, between 2 and 2.5%, but a more than one-in-three chance
that it will be above 2.5%, and an almost 1 in 5 chance that it will be below 1.5%.
As this illustrates, one implication of widening the fan charts has been to increase the
perceived risk of some rather unattractive outcomes – either that growth slows too sharply, or
that inflation does not return to target following an upward spike. In particular both the upper
tail of the inflation forecast – where inflation expectations might well come seriously adrift –
and the bottom tail of the output forecast – where there could be a risk of setting off a
deflationary spiral – are to be avoided, if at all possible.
In this situation, it is not unreasonable to suppose that the Committee will be more sensitive
than usual to changes in the balance of risks.
Since neither of the key risks to the outlook is readily modelled or measured, monitoring
them is not going to be easy. But we do have a framework for thinking about them, and a
variety of timely surveys and indicators which can act as early warning signs.
On the impact of the credit shock, we will be monitoring our new quarterly credit conditions
survey of lenders, and special surveys from our own Agents, as well as the full range of
indicators of the price and quantity of credit.
On inflation expectations, we pay close attention to a wide range of information drawn from
surveys, and financial market prices, recognising that they are all, in different ways, tricky to
interpret. We also need to be mindful of the risk that any further increases in the prices of
everyday items like food and energy will heighten public perceptions of inflation, and raise
expectations about the future overall rate of CPI inflation.
Conclusion
The outlook for the economy looks very different now from a year ago. We are seeing some
powerful global forces playing out, in financial markets, in commodity markets, and in the
world’s largest economies. Their impact on the UK is highly uncertain, partly because they

BIS Review 22/2008

5

are hard to understand and to predict, and partly because much will depend on the way
policymakers around the world respond.
The MPC will need to respond continuously and flexibly to its assessment of the changing
balance of two key risks. On the one hand, there is a risk that demand will slow too sharply,
but on the other there is a risk that a temporary shock to inflation will prove persistent.
A temporary pick-up in inflation – by itself – does not mean that the Committee needs to
tolerate a significant weakening in demand. But if inflation expectations appear to be
persistently elevated, then the Committee will need to tolerate more slack to keep inflation on
target. And that means it will have less scope to respond to slowing demand – the risk posed
by the current turmoil in financial markets.

6

BIS Review 22/2008

Annex: Charts2
Chart 1: CPI fanchart from February
2007 Inflation Report, and outturns
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier

Chart 2: GDP fanchart from February
2007 Inflation Report, and outturns
Percentage change in output on a year earlier

4

CPI outturns

6
5

GDP outturns
3

4
3

2
2
1

1

0
0
02

03

04

05

06

07

08

09

10

Chart 3: CPI fanchart from February 2008
Inflation Report

2

-1
02

03

04

05

06

07

08

09

10

Chart 4: GDP fanchart from February 2008
Inflation Report

All fan charts and probability bar charts shown are conditioned on market interest rates.

BIS Review 22/2008

7

Chart 5: Commodity price developments

US $ per barrel

Index, 2000=100

100
90

Economist food price index
(right hand axis)

80

Chart 6: GDP growth probabilities from
February 2008 Inflation Report

250

200

70
60

150

50
40

100

30
20

50

10
Brent dollar oil price (left hand axis)
0

1990

0
1993

1996

1999

2002

2005

2008

Chart 7: CPI inflation probabilities from
February 2008 Inflation Report

8

BIS Review 22/2008

John Gieve: The return of the credit cycle – old lessons in new markets
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Euromoney Bond
Investors Congress, London, 27 February 2008.
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the Bank of
England’s website.

*

*

*

Introduction
The turmoil in credit markets since August has been novel in some ways; but in others, the
longer it has gone on the more familiar it has seemed. It has been looking less and less like
the crystallisation of a “tail” risk – the “unprecedented and unforeseeable” event described by
Northern Rock directors – and more and more like the unwinding of a wider credit boom
during which risk premia had become unsustainably compressed. The excesses may have
been most obvious in the complexities of structured credit and the sub-prime sector but they
have not been confined to them.
As in previous banking cycles, a period of strong growth, low interest rates and rapid
increases in asset prices lead to over confidence and bad lending at the top of the cycle;
defaults, deleveraging and retrenchment follow in the downswing. But the way this old story
has unfolded through the new credit markets has sprung some unpleasant surprises,
including the speed with which losses in just one market in one country – the housing market
in the US – have disrupted wider credit markets in all advanced economies.
The upswing – a new structure of banking
The roots of the problem lay in the so-called “great stability” of steady growth and inflation
and in particular the last five years of persistently low nominal interest rates.
The confidence born of that stability was combined with an increased institutional demand for
fixed income and heightened international competition among the largest banks to develop
scale. That led to a remarkable decline in corporate investment yields which was matched,
and for a while seemed justified, by declining volatility (see Chart 1 which shows the fall the
spreads and volatility of high yield bonds). 1 And it put pressure on investors to find new ways
of generating returns from credit. At the same time advances in IT and financial modelling
allowed the development of new derivatives, and the slicing, dicing and recombining of
credits in new structured credit instruments.
The search for yield would have made the US sub-prime mortgage market attractive to many
investors. What made it irresistible was the financial engineering that offered high yields with
high credit ratings.
The success of structured credit created a huge demand for the raw material of these
products in particular sub-prime mortgages (Chart 2). It allowed banks to move increasingly
from the traditional “lend and hold” model towards an “originate and distribute” model. This
boosted the supply of credit and allowed risk to be more widely dispersed across the system
as a whole. But it also involved a long chain of participants from the original lenders to endinvestors. Investors at the end of this chain, who bore the final risk, had less information
about the underlying quality of loans than those at the start and became very dependent on
rating agencies and their models. It also reduced the incentives on originators to assess and
monitor credit risk carefully.

1

The dotted line represents the end of 2006.

BIS Review 24/2008

1

The downswing – how the crisis unfolded
Growing problems in the sub-prime market started the downswing. Chart 3 compares the
path of US housing prices with the price of the triple-B ABX index (which captures the cost of
insuring against default losses on sub-prime mortgages) and bank equity prices:
•

As you can see, the US housing market began to turn down in mid 2006; and banks
holding sub-prime loans on balance sheet began to make provisions at that point.

•

But it wasn’t until early in 2007 that rising defaults led to markdowns in even the
riskier tranches of sub-prime backed securities.

•

Last summer, problems at Bear Stearns, IKB and BNP Paribas brought home to
investors the market risks they were running and led to an “investors’ strike” on
mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed commercial paper.

•

That in turn led banks to hoard liquidity; inter-bank markets spreads rose and
volumes fell beyond the very short term; Northern Rock ran out of road, and bank
equity prices began to drop.

•

For a few weeks in October the market thought the worst was over but the
publication of Q3 results renewed fears about the scale of bank losses which
sparked a new squeeze in the money markets and a further sharp fall in bank share
prices towards the end of the year.

•

Co-ordinated action by central banks helped to ease the short-term funding
pressures at the year end (Chart 4); and hopes rose that the acute phase was over
as banks declared their losses and, where necessary, managed to attract new
capital including from sovereign wealth funds.

Where we are now
But markets have remained difficult in the New Year. While LIBOR spreads have not
returned to the levels of early December, money markets are sticky. Corporate bond and
credit default swap rates have continued to climb, leveraged loan prices are dropping quickly,
securitisation markets remain largely closed and the CDS and equity prices for banks
continue to deteriorate.
This continuing strain reflects three main factors.
First, it reflects fears about the future path of the economy especially in the US and the scale
of new losses that may bring – not just in housing, but also in other forms of lending.
Second, however, there is continuing uncertainty about the scale and distribution of losses
that have already occurred:
•

To illustrate the uncertainty on overall scale, Chart 5 sets out different estimates of
sub-prime losses based on different estimation methods. First, given the length of
the foreclosure process, realised losses on the sub-prime mortgages which underpin
securities may not total much more than $30 billion so far. Second, if projecting
forward the rate at which delinquencies are cumulating on recent vintages of subprime mortgages, we can estimate that losses on the securitised loans might
ultimately exceed $150 billion. Thirdly, using the sub-prime ABX indices to “mark-tomarket” sub-prime securities, can produce figures of $300 to 400 billion. Against
these figures, international banks have so far announced writedowns (net of
hedging) of $100 to $150 billion.

•

Although these are huge numbers, they amount to less than 1% of the total assets
of the Large Complex Financial Institutions (LCFIs) in the US and Europe. In relation

2

BIS Review 24/2008

to GDP, even the higher estimates would be comparable to the losses in the
Savings and Loans crisis. 2
•

But the securitisation model has not just made it difficult to scale the problem; it has
added a large measure of uncertainty and opacity to the distribution of losses and
that is a key factor in the continued reluctance to lend and the closure of most ABS
markets. The current worries on the future of the monoline bond insurers reflected in
their CDS prices in Chart 6 are exacerbating the uncertainties about individual
banks’ exposures.

The third factor is the dislocation of the investor base for ABS. Since the summer many of
the main buyers of ABS have withdrawn from the market. The conduits and SIVs are greatly
diminished where they are not being wound up altogether. And the money market and other
funds that stepped away from these off-balance-sheet vehicles are not willing at least yet to
buy ABS directly. Finding new homes for these securities is bound to take time. So long as
there are known to be reluctant holders, even long term real money investors will tend to hold
back to see whether prices are driven lower in coming months by forced sales. On the other
side many issuers are reluctant to accept the prices on offer today since they could become
benchmarks for the future.
Lessons from the crisis
The story is far from over but it is still possible to identify some lessons. The past seven
months have taught market participants a lot about the risks and limitations of the new
markets and their business models; their responses will be the most powerful force for
change. On the official side, a recent consultative document has set out proposed responses
by the UK tripartite authorities. 3 Internationally, the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), which
draws together central banks, supervisors and finance ministries from the main financial
centres, is co-ordinating an action plan for authorities to develop and implement
recommendations across a number of areas (Chart 7). 4
Among the key lessons are:
•

the critical importance of liquidity, alongside capital, in managing and regulating
banks;

•

the limitations of the models which underpin the valuation and rating of structured
products;

•

the importance of disclosure on risk exposures and valuation practices for the
maintenance of confidence and effective market functioning in times of stress;

•

the need to alter the adverse incentives that had developed in the distribution chain
for mortgages including for originators to maximise the volume of loans, for the

2

Arguably the cash flow projection of losses of $150 billion comes closest to the sort of provisions banks would
be making if the loans had been held on their banking books rather than securitised and sold on. On that basis
the losses currently projected would be only 50% of the Savings and Loans losses as a share of US GDP.

3

See “Financial stability and depositor protection: strengthening the framework”, Consultation Document,
January 2008. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/financialstabilityanddepositorprotection080130.pdf

4

Private sector initiatives have also been launched. There are European industry plans to compile information
on a variety of instruments including ABCP, ABS and CDO and to disseminate this to investors and other
interested parties on a regular basis. See “Summary of European Industry Commitments to the European
Commission
regarding
Transparency
in
the
European
Securitisation
Market”
(www.europeansecuritisation.com/Industry-letter-08Feb08.pdf). The Institute of International Finance (IIF) also
has an active agenda of work, covering risk management, liquidity, valuation, ratings, and transparency. (See
http://www.iif.com/press/press+releases+2007/press+46.php).

BIS Review 24/2008

3

rating agencies to expand their scope as widely as possible, and for banks to use
off-balance-sheet vehicles; and
•

improving crisis management arrangements, including the process for providing
liquidity to institutions under stress and for restructuring weak and failing banks.

Measuring and adjusting for risk
The focus of this work is the recent structural changes in banking and credit markets and
ways to prevent those making the financial system more prone or less resilient to large
cyclical swings.
That is important. But we have been here before. It is not so long since a vast amount of
work was set in train in the wake of the LTCM crisis in 1998 and again after the dotcom
boom blew out. While each crisis has its own idiosyncrasies there are common elements and
they too need to be addressed.
In my view the key lies in the measurement of risk and the repeated inclination to underprice
risks at the top of the cycle and thus take comfort from exaggerated estimates of risk
adjusted returns; and the corollary, a tendency to overprice risk as the cycle swings down.
At the macro level it is hard to assess what is a warranted rise in asset prices and what an
unsustainable boom; in regulation it has proved hard to design systems which adjust
appropriately for the cycle, never mind which effectively lean against it; and at the micro level
firms find it difficult to measure the risks in their strategies and to base their targets and
incentive systems on risk adjusted returns.
We must try to align incentives between actual risk and return by improving risk management
practices (for example on off-balance sheet activities) and rectifying the revealed
weaknesses in the originate-to-distribute model whether in the US mortgage market, in
valuation practices or in the use of rating agencies. But we know that many of the incentive
problems are deeply embedded – after all, asymmetry is inherent in any limited liability
arrangement. The protection of depositors is well established. And it is hard for firms to take
account of the collective implications for the credit cycle of their individual behaviours.
Of course there is a role for monetary policy in smoothing the cycle but it has to address the
whole economy and not just the financial sector. So we need also to consider again how far
we can make our regulatory regime for capital and liquidity counter cyclical – that is create a
system which raises requirements as the boom gathers pace in order to dampen the upswing
and create additional headroom for losses as the cycle turns. Basle II is a step in the right
direction in many ways, particularly in its treatment of off-balance sheet vehicles and in
stimulating improved risk management systems, but it still has known pro-cyclical features
which we need to address. If we cannot do so effectively an alternative may be to require
larger capital and liquidity buffers across the whole cycle.
The past seven months have been testimony to Mark Twain’s comment that “history doesn’t
repeat itself but it does sometimes rhyme.” The structured credit markets and the growth of
“originate and distribute” banking have amplified the turmoil in credit markets in recent
months. But under the new clothes, the old credit cycle is still recognisable. It is important we
learn the lessons about the new credit instruments and markets. But we also need to
address again the roots of the credit cycle.

4

BIS Review 24/2008

Chart 1: Credit spreads: levels and
volatility(a)
Basis points
300

Chart 2: Global RMBS, CMBS and ABS
issuance
US$ billions

Basis points
1600
(b)

Spread (rhs)
Volatility (lhs)

1400

250

1200
200

3,000

ABS excluding MBS
RMBS Non Prime
RMBS Prime
CMBS

2,500
2,000

1000

150

800

1,500

600

100

1,000

400
50

500

200

U
0

0

0
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06

98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08

Sources: Merrill Lynch and Bank calculations.
(a) Option-adjusted spreads over government bond yields
and 90-day annualised historical volatilities.
(b) 31 Dec. 2006.

Source: Dealogic

Chart 3: Housing problems spread to
banks(a)

Chart 4: 3-month LIBOR spreads over
expected policy rates(a)(b)

Index
104

Price / Index
140

Basis points
120

102

120

100

100

100

80

98

80

96

60

94
92

ABX index (BBB 2006H1) (rhs)
Global bank equity index (rhs)
Case Shiller US property index (lhs)

90
Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan.
2006

2007

40

40

20

United States

20

United Kingdom
0

08

Source: Datastream and JP Morgan Chase & Co.
(a) Equity and property indices rebased to Jan. 06 = 100.

BIS Review 24/2008

60

Euro area
Jan.

Apr.

Jul.
2007

Oct.

Feb.

May.
08

0
-20

Aug.

Source: Bloomberg.
(a) 3-month LIBOR spreads over 3-month overnight
index swap (OIS) rates.
(b) Solid lines show 3 month historical data, with dotted
lines derived from forwards.

5

Chart 5: Sub-prime mortgage losses

Chart 6: Monoline CDS prices(a)

US$ billions
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Default
losses to
date
(a)

Projected
losses
(cashflow
method)

Projected Writedowns
losses
to date
(market
prices)
(b)

Sources: Bloomberg, Banks' financial statements and
Bank calculations.
(a) Estimated default losses to date on subprime
securities based on cumulative delinquency rates.
(b) Net of hedging.

•

•

Sources: Bank of England, Barclays Capital, Goldman
Sachs, IMF and Moodys.
(a) Average of bid and offer premia of five-year senior
debt CDS contracts.

Chart 7: Key strands of FSF work
Supervisory framework and oversight
−

Capital arrangements

−

Liquidity buffers

−

Risk management practices

−

Off balance sheet activities
Underpinnings of the originate and distribute
model

•

Uses and role of credit ratings

•

Market transparency

•

Supervisory and regulatory responsiveness
to risks

•

Authorities’ ability to respond to crises

6

BIS Review 24/2008

John Gieve: Sovereign wealth funds and global imbalances
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Sovereign
Wealth Management Conference, London, 14 March 2008.
* * *
Introduction
Much of the debate on sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) has focused on political questions: do
they reintroduce the failings of public ownership into market economies by the back door, will
SWFs use their ownership rights to pursue political ends, and will resistance to foreign
ownership lead to a new wave of protectionism. I want to concentrate today on some
economic issues: why have they become so prominent recently, how does that relate to
imbalances in the world economy, how are they affecting financial markets and what are the
policy implications of their growth.
Background
But first let me set out some of the background.
There is no off the shelf definition of an SWF. What I have in mind is a government
investment vehicle that manages foreign assets with a higher risk tolerance and higher
expected returns than for central bank foreign currency reserves. 1 The size of such funds is
hard to measure, but may be in the $2-3 trillion range.
Origins of SWFs
Investments by SWFs are one type of capital flow between countries so they have always
been closely related to global imbalances in trade. When countries run surpluses on their
current account, they generate equal and opposite net capital outflows of one sort or another
and those capital flows produce an investment income.
That has been the story of the UK economy over the last 150 years. We ran continuous
surpluses in the 50 years before the first world war (Chart 1) and built up a large stock of
foreign assets. Partly as a result of that, we benefited from a surplus on our investment
account for most of the period since the 1870s.
There are two key differences between that period of the UK’s investment abroad and the
situation today. 100 years ago the developed countries were investing in emerging markets
(at the time in the Americas and Australia) which had abundant land and natural resources
but scarce capital and so the returns were high. Currently, capital is flowing “uphill” from
emerging to mature economies. Secondly, the investors before were mainly in the private
sector and were seeking out the best returns on capital. Today the investors are mainly EME
central banks and governments and the build up of foreign assets reflects their policy
choices.

1

There is some fuzziness at the edges of this definition. Central bank reserves in some countries, which
traditionally have been invested mainly in liquid and safe instruments, are increasingly being switched into
riskier assets. Also, in some countries, state-owned banks and companies invest in foreign assets where
some of the policy issues are the same as for sovereign wealth funds.

BIS Review 31/2008

1

Modern sovereign wealth funds are not new, in fact the first – the Kuwait Investment Office –
was set up here in London in February 1953 – just as Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay
were setting out to climb Everest. 2 And the number of funds has been increasing since then
like the traffic on the slopes of Everest.
The next wave were set up by other oil producers after the price increases in the 70s and
80s for persuasive reasons (Chart 2). First oil is a non-renewable resource so it can make
sense for governments to spread the benefits of this endowment across generations by
investing part of today’s income in assets that will provide an income tomorrow. That would
be so even if the path of oil prices was predictable but in fact it is not. That uncertainty about
future income provides a second case for saving today. In the late 1970s, some oil exporters
increased spending to match higher incomes and faced a painful adjustment when prices fell
back again. Third, even if the rise in income was permanent there would be a case for
phasing the growth of domestic spending and investment to prevent supply bottlenecks
leading to inflation.
Recent growth of SWFs
Since the millennium at least 10 new SWFs have been set up and there are reports of plans
for more for example in Brazil, Japan and India.
This reflects the remarkable shift of emerging-market economies from debtors to creditors.
Ten years ago – at the time of the Asian crisis – emerging markets as a whole were running
a current account deficit. Since then they have been running progressively bigger current
account surpluses reaching an estimated $685 billion last year (1.3 % of world GDP). 3 The
counterpart to this is that developed countries as a group have been running progressively
bigger current account deficits not just in the United States but also in a number of other
developed countries including the UK. 4 Of course there are some notable exceptions in each
group: Canada, Japan and Germany for example are still creditors while many countries in
central and eastern Europe and Africa are running large deficits. But maps 1 and 2 show how
much the pattern has changed in the last 10 years. Most of South America and South East
Asia have swung from deficit to surplus. Perhaps as important, the scale of the differences
has grown with more countries running surpluses or deficits of over 5% of GDP.
Oil and other commodity inflation is part of the story, of course, but that does not account for
the large current surpluses in most of East Asia. Here strong manufacturing growth resulting
from higher labour productivity has not been matched by higher domestic spending so
savings have grown ahead of even dramatic investment growth. A deliberate policy of
fostering export industrial growth has slowed the rise of exchange rates that would reduce
these imbalances.
As a result the build-up in EME foreign assets have been held mainly as central bank
reserves especially in Asian countries (Chart 3). In total the foreign assets now held by EME
central banks and governments is about $7 trillion dollars, which compares with only $60
billion gross foreign assets held by the UK government. Many emerging economies
concluded after the Asian crisis a decade ago that they needed bigger liquid reserves in
traditional government debt to defend themselves against volatility in financial markets even
when that carried the likelihood of a negative return (taking account of expected exchange

2

The Kuwait Investment Office is the in-house investment arm of the Kuwait Investment Authority (formerly
known as the Kuwait Investment Board) and was established by Sheikh Abdullah Al-Salem Al-Sabah on
23 February 1953. Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay reached the summit on 29 May 1953.

3

These figures include the NICs. Excluding NICs the estimated surplus is $596 billion (1.1%).

4

Latest data show that current account deficits were 5% of GDP or above not only in the United States but
also in Spain, Greece, Portugal, Australia, New Zealand, UK and Iceland.

2

BIS Review 31/2008

rate movements). But when the reserves outstripped the levels needed for that purpose, it
was natural to look to increase the returns on investment by widening the range of
investments. 5
And in the next few years, these current account surpluses are likely to remain high and the
build up of foreign assets by governments in oil exporting and Asian countries is likely to
continue. According to the IMF’s forecasts, the combined current account surplus of China
and oil-exporting countries will be around $800 billion over the next 3 years. And the
IMF estimates that sovereign wealth fund assets could grow to $6-10 trillion within the next 5
years.
The impact of SWFs on financial markets
These are huge numbers and SWFs have become prominent and important players in many
financial markets. But we should not exaggerate their impact on the global financial system.
In aggregate, their assets under management are currently only less than one-twentieth of
those held by private sector participants such as pension, insurance and mutual funds as
well as hedge funds and private equity (Chart 4). And they account for about 2% of the total
size of equity and bond markets globally. Even in five years time – and on some of the
fastest growth projections – assets under management by sovereign wealth funds are
projected to reach only about 6% of global financial assets. 6 Moreover, though they have
more assets under management than hedge funds they have smaller investments since they
are not leveraged. 7
It is not difficult to identify positive effects on the world’s capital markets. Sovereign wealth
funds have long investment horizons and generally have no commercial liabilities. Therefore,
in periods of market stress they are likely to face less pressure than most private investors to
reduce the size or increase the liquidity of their investments. They are well placed to play a
contrarian role and help to stabilise markets by investing in times of stress. For example,
when the global equity market fell sharply between 2000 and 2002, the Norwegian
Government Pension Fund was a large buyer of global equities. And a number of sovereign
wealth funds have played an important and welcome stabilising role during the current
turmoil by providing around $40 billion of new capital since November to some of the world’s
biggest commercial and investment banks (Table 1). 8
Taking a broader view, the switch of some reserves from government debt into SWFs which
invest in a wider range of instruments should help to improve the allocation of resources if
these investments are based on commercial criteria. Investing in equities may also help to
reinforce and bring to the surface the common interest that EMEs and the advanced
economies have in the good performance of the companies involved and the markets they
operate in. It may thus help to integrate EMEs into the global financial system and encourage
them to participate more in global policy making.
From a parochial point of view, the prospective increase in demand for equities relative to
bonds could have a positive impact on London and sterling. Whereas the value of the UK

5

Foreign reserves held by EME central banks as a whole are about 60% (close to $3 trillion) higher than
needed for conventional precautionary reasons to cover short-term external debt.

6

Morgan Stanley, "Sovereign Wealth Funds and Bond and Equity Prices", 31 May 2007.

7

That said, the assets held by sovereign wealth funds are highly concentrated, with around 70% of total assets
held by the five largest funds. So the largest sovereign wealth funds could have an impact on some markets
especially smaller ones such as other EMEs.

8

Also, a number of central banks from countries with large current account deficits have been willing throughout
the current liquidity crisis to lend to international banks, including UK ones, at longer, three-to-twelve month,
maturities.

BIS Review 31/2008

3

market for public debt securities is only 3.3% of the global market, UK equities account for
7½% of the value of global equities. The rapid growth in sovereign wealth funds is also a fillip
for London as a leading international financial centre.
SWFs and transparency
The main doubts concern their objectives and how far their investments will be driven only by
financial returns.
Public sector owners might have other objectives including national political interests, such
as, accessing military technology, controlling strategic resources or markets, and influencing
public opinion. 9 There are often complaints that sovereign wealth funds lack transparency.
Decoded, this is a request for reassurance about their investment policies.
I am certainly not going to argue against more transparency (except in the very special case
of the market operations of central banks). More openness from SWFs may help to alleviate
concerns in recipient countries – and thus reduce protectionist pressures. And it may
improve the dissemination of information to market participants and to their own citizens. I
know many SWFs are working with the IMF to produce a voluntary code of conduct that is
based on best practices for the governance and transparency of sovereign wealth funds. For
example, it would be helpful if all sovereign wealth funds were transparent about their overall
strategies, objectives and broad investment guidelines. Norway’s Government Pension Fund
is a good example in this respect.
But there should be a level playing field applied to all investors. The case for greater
transparency applies to other investors too. SWFs may take some comfort that they are not
being singled out and that there are equally powerful pressures for transparency on hedge
funds and private equity investors. In this respect, two recent initiatives are particularly
welcome. First, a report under the chairmanship of Sir Andrew Large – my predecessor as
Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank – on voluntary standards, including on
disclosure, for hedge funds. And, second, a report by Sir David Walker – a former Executive
Director of the Bank – on guidelines for disclosure and transparency by private equity
funds. 10
And transparency should not be one sided among countries. I know SWFs themselves are
often keen for more transparency from recipient countries on whether and how far they are
welcome and the rules of engagement.
The UK in recent years has been unusually open to foreign investors and foreign ownership
both in comparison to our past and in comparison to most other developed (and emerging)
countries today. We have relied on regulation of infrastructure industries and on competition
law to prevent the abuse of market power and most of our utilities, much of the financial
sector, as well as an increasing number of our leading football clubs have come into foreign
ownership. In its latest survey of international direct investment trends, the OECD ranked the
UK as having one of the least restrictive regulatory environment for foreign direct investment
across all OECD member countries (Chart 5). And the UK has welcomed a number of SWFs
to London as a base for international operations.

9

Note though that this distinction between foreign public and private sector owners is not cut and dried. Foreign
private sector purchases of football teams or newspapers do not always seem to be driven by the profit
motive.

10

Hedge Fund Working Group (2008), "Hedge Fund Standards: Final Report" and Walker Working Group
(2007), "Guidelines for Disclosure and Transparency in Private Equity". The Large Report recommends a set
of best practice standards for hedge funds in terms of disclosure, valuation, risk, governance and shareholder
conduct. The Walker Report recommends a set of guidelines for disclosure and transparency by private equity
funds, including the publication of regular information on their financing, ownership and prospects.

4

BIS Review 31/2008

Sovereign wealth funds and global imbalances
However, the emphasis on transparency and the politics of SWFs risks missing a bigger
policy issue: the recent rapid growth in SWFs reflects large and persistent global imbalances
which are a continuing threat to the stability of the world financial system and the global
economy.
Global imbalances and financial crises
While there are many examples of countries which have run deficits for many years such as
Australia and New Zealand, history also shows how painful the eventual adjustment can be.
There are many examples in which capital flight has resulted in a huge fall in GDP growth
and broader financial crises – for example in Latin America in the early 1980s, in the Nordic
countries in the early 1990s and the east Asian economies a decade ago – which, in turn,
weakened global GDP growth or global financial institutions.
Countries with large deficits are vulnerable to a rapid reversal of capital flows. If investors are
no longer willing to finance the deficit, domestic spending will need to be cut relative to output
through a combination of reducing spending and switching production to the tradable sector.
A recent IMF study reviewed 42 episodes of large reductions in current account deficits in
developed countries over the past 40 years. In a quarter of the cases, which were mainly
countries with limited real exchange rate depreciation, annual GDP growth fell by 3½
percentage points on average. 11
There are dangers too for surplus countries. Large foreign exchange inflows are not easy to
sterilise. They tend to contribute to asset price bubbles and higher inflation which itself can
undermine economic and financial stability. The effect of such inflows into China and oilexporting countries have been compounded recently by their exchange rates being pegged
or managed against the falling dollar. This has contributed not just to the build up of reserves
and SWFs but also to the build up of inflationary pressures within these countries.
No one would blame EMEs for the current turmoil in Western financial markets. It has been
generated at home by the widespread mispricing of financial assets; this has been most
obvious among the assets based on the US housing market but it is not confined to that
sector. However the way that the boom developed did owe a great deal to global imbalances.
The “savings glut”, to quote Ben Bernanke 12, that developed in the oil exporting countries
and China contributed to the fall in real long-term interest rates. 13 In the UK, for example, real
long-term interest rates, measured by the difference between the nominal 10-year
government bond yield and the annual rate of inflation, fell from around 3.9% in 1997 to 1.6%
in 2005. A similar pattern was also evident in the US (Chart 6). In particular, interest rates on
safe assets fell since the build up in foreign assets were invested mainly in government
bonds. 14 That both discouraged saving and boosted asset prices. In order to maintain their
traditional returns, the private sector sought higher yielding strategies and were too ready to

11

IMF (2007) ‘Exchange rates and the adjustment of external imbalances’ IMF WEO April, Chapter 3.

12

Bernanke, B (2007) "Global Imbalances: Recent Developments and Prospects", speech delivered for the
Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, and Bernanke, B (2005) "The Global Savings Glut and the U.S. Current Account
Deficit", speech delivered for the Sandridge Lecture at the Virginia Association of Economists.

13

A fall in desired investment (investment ‘strike’) in some countries also contributed to the decline in global real
interest rates. For example, investment-GDP ratios fell sharply in the Newly Industrialised Countries in the
wake of the east Asian crisis a decade ago.

14

For example FE Warnock and VC Warnock (2006) (‘International Capital Flows and US interest rates’, NBER
Working Paper, 12560) estimate that foreign official flows reduced US 10-year Treasury nominal yields by
about 100 basis points lower than otherwise in the year to June 2005.

BIS Review 31/2008

5

believe that these could be attained through new products without running bigger risks. We
are now dealing with the consequences of that mistake.
Global imbalances – where to from here
Looking forward, the unwinding of global imbalances requires some combination of a
slowdown in the growth of domestic demand in deficit countries and an increase in domestic
demand in surplus countries. If the slowdown is not to dominate, we need to see a shift in
relative prices to rebalance demand – that is a gradual real exchange rate depreciation of
deficit countries against surplus ones.
The rise of SWFs may play a part in this dynamic. Their emergence is a sign that surplus
countries may be less willing in future to accept such low yielding assets. That should put
pressure on exchange rates to adjust and contribute to a reduction in global imbalances. So
while SWFs may be a product of global imbalances, they may also play a part in the
adjustment.
There are signs that in the United States, at least, imbalances are beginning to adjust. The
US current account deficit now looks past its peak and the marked fall in the dollar – about
25% in real traded-weighted terms – since its peak in early 2002 should help in the
adjustment. However, the decline in US relative demand is coming about mainly through
slower domestic demand growth at home rather than faster demand growth abroad while the
dollar has fallen less against currencies with the largest current account surpluses (Chart 7).
There is a risk, therefore, that the fall in the US current deficit will not be matched by a fall of
surpluses in high surplus countries but a rise in deficits in other deficit countries. The
imbalances could be transferred not reduced.
So it is important that the current large gap between savings and investment in the Far East
and oil exporting countries narrows. In the near term, the ability to increase spending will be
constrained by the recent increase in inflationary pressures in these countries. But more
exchange rate flexibility should be helpful on both fronts. And over the medium-term, in oil
exporting countries, government spending is likely to increase further in response to past
increases in incomes since part of the rise in the oil price looks to be permanent. This gives
oil exporters the opportunity to spend more on diversifying production in their economies. It is
encouraging also that in China the government has plans to increase its own expenditure on
the infrastructure, encourage higher spending by households through speeding up financial
sector reform and improving the safety net as well as allowing more flexibility than in the past
in the exchange rate.
Conclusion
Given the growth of the foreign currency reserves in many EMEs, the emergence of
SWFs making long term investments on financial criteria in a wider range of instruments is a
positive development. Some increase in the transparency both of the strategy and objectives
of the funds and of recipient countries’ approach to inward investment should help dispel
concerns and ensure they are a force for greater global financial integration rather than a
prompt for a new wave of financial protectionism. SWF’s recent investments in global
financial institutions have been helpful in easing the current financial market turmoil. And the
fact that they, and their central banks, are looking for higher returns and greater asset
diversification should be beneficial both to the EMEs and to the recipient countries since it
should improve the efficiency of global asset allocation.
But that positive story should not conceal that the growth of SWFs is also a result of
persistent global imbalances in trade. These imbalances have helped create vulnerabilities in
financial markets and in the wider economy. Our current experience is one more illustration
of how painful the unwinding of such imbalances can be.

6

BIS Review 31/2008

Chart 1: Current account balances in
the first wave of financial globalisation

Chart 2: Number of sovereign wealth
funds since the 1950s

Per cent of own GDP
United Kingdom
Germany
15
Western Europe
France
10

Number of SWFs
30
25

5
0

20

-5
15

-10
-15

10

-20
Canada
Australia
Argentina

-25
'New World' countries

5

-30
-35

1870

1877

1884

1891

1898

1905

1912

Source: Taylor, A (2002), “A century of current account
dynamics”, Journal of International Money and Finance, pp
725-748.

0
1950s 1960s

1970s 1980s

1990s 2000s

Source: Morgan Stanley, Deutsche Bank

Global map 1: Current account positions (% of own GDP) in 1997

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, 2007

BIS Review 31/2008

7

Global map 2: Current account positions (% of own GDP) in 2007

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, 2007

Chart 3: Global holdings of fx reserves
(excluding gold), 1995-2007
US$tn

China
Japan
Russia
Other Asia (a)
Other EMEs
Developed countries (b)

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

Source: International Financial Statistics.
(a) Excluding China and Japan.
(b) Excluding Japan.

8

BIS Review 31/2008

Chart 4: Assets under management by
SWFs relative to other investors and
size of capital markets, 2006(a)
EME

Siz e of e quity and
bond marke ts

US
Global
Private equity
Hedge Funds
SWFs

Asse ts unde r
manage me nt by
type of inve stor

FX reserves (a)
Insurance assets
Mutual Funds
Pension Funds
0

25

50

75

100

125

150

US$tn
(a) FX reserve holdings and estimates of SWF assets
under management are for 2007.
Source: IMF GFSR September 2007, McKinsey and Co.,
International Financial Statistics, various estimates of SWF
assets under management.

Table 1: SWF capital injections in financial institutions since November 2007

Date of
announcement

Sovereign Wealth Fund

Financial
Institution

Amount
(US$bn)

26/11/2007

Abu Dhabi Investment
Authority

Citigroup

7.5

10/12/2007

GIC - Singapore

UBS

9.8

19/12/2007

China Investment Corporation

Morgan Stanley

5.0

24/12/2007

Temasek - Singapore

Merrill Lynch

4.4

GIC - Singapore
15/01/2008

6.9
Citigroup

Kuwait Investment Authority

3.0

Korea Investment Corporation

2.0

15/01/2008

Merrill Lynch
Kuwait Investment Authority

2.0

TOTAL

40.6

Source: Press releases, market reports.

BIS Review 31/2008

9

Chart 5: OECD FDI regulatory restrictiveness
index, 2006
OECD regulatory restrictiveness score
0.4
0.3
Less restrictive

More restrictive

0.3
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1

Belgium
Germany
UK
Italy
Netherlenads
Ireland
France
Japan
US
Korea
Portugal
Czech Rep.
Slovak Rep.
Denmark
Spain
Austria
Norway
Sweden
Poland
Hungary
New Zeal.
Turkey
Switzerland
Finland
Greece
Canada
Australia
Mexico
Iceland

0.0

Source: OECD

Chart 6: Real long-term interest rates(a)
in the UK and the US, 1987-2007
US

UK

Per cent
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1

1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005
(a) Nominal yields on 10-year government bonds minus the
12-month rate of inflation.
Source: Bloomberg, International Financial Statistics, Bank
calculations.

10

Chart 7: Nominal exchange rate
adjustments since 2002(a) and current
account balances(b)
Appreciation against the US$
80 Australia
Euro Area Norway
70
60
Canada
Switzerland
50
40 UK
Russia
Singapore
30
20
China
Kuwait
10
0
-10
-20 Mexico
Other Middle East oil exporters
-30
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Current account balance (% of own GDP), 2007
Source: IMF, Bank calculations.
(a) February 2002 to January 2008.
(b) Estimated current account balance in 2007.

BIS Review 31/2008

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Extract from a speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Bank of
Israel, Jerusalem, 31 March 2008.
*

*

*

Central banks, along with the rest of the financial world, have changed markedly over the
past 20 years. More open and competitive financial systems have developed hand in hand
with a recognition that the prime responsibility of central banks is to maintain price stability.
To help them achieve that, more and more central banks around the world have been made
independent of Government. The nature and extent of that independence varies from country
to country, but in essence it is the freedom of either an individual Governor or a Monetary
Policy Committee within the central bank to set interest rates free from political interference.
That policy independence needs to be backed by organisational and financial independence
which, in the case of the Bank of England, is entrusted to a Court of Directors of the Bank
which decides on the budget and other relevant financial matters.
For those central banks with a long tradition of independence, their pre-existing frameworks
of monetary policy have proved sufficient to enable them to bring inflation down and
contribute to what has become known as the Great Stability. But in most of the countries
whose central banks have been made independent more recently, policy has been based on
an explicit inflation target. Inflation targeting has been the framework of choice for the past 20
years. It most clearly represents an explicit commitment by the central bank to the objective
of price stability. In the United Kingdom, that commitment is in the form of a target for
inflation that is defined as 2% a year, as measured by the consumer price index.
In the medium term, a central bank can affect only monetary values – the price level. It
cannot change the amount of goods and services an economy is able to produce. Over time,
there is no trade off between inflation and output, as recent UK history illustrates. Between
1950 and 1997, UK inflation averaged nearly 6%. In contrast, since 1997, inflation has been
close to target and much more stable, but annual output growth has averaged a little above
its post-World War II average of 2.5%. In the medium term, low and stable inflation does not
imply lower output. Moreover, even in the short term, meeting an inflation target is in many
cases fully consistent with maintaining steady growth of activity. If demand falls below the
supply capacity of the economy, inflation will tend to fall. If demand rises too quickly, putting
pressure on capacity, inflation will tend to rise.
Inflation-targeting central banks can, however, face an apparent dilemma when inflation
moves away from the target not as the result of fluctuations in demand, but in response to
commodity price changes. Following increases in gas and electricity bills, consumer price
inflation in the UK has risen. The central projection in our February Inflation Report is for it to
rise further, to around 3%. That pronounced pickup stems from sharp rises in commodity
prices around the world. Food prices on world markets are more than 50% higher, and oil
prices two-thirds higher, than they were a year ago.
To some it might seem odd that an inflation targeting central bank has not tried to offset
those inflationary pressures. That is because we operate “flexible” inflation targeting within a
framework that recognises that it is not, in practice, always possible to keep inflation at
target. The remit for our Monetary Policy Committee states that:
“The framework takes into account that any economy at some point can suffer from external
events or temporary difficulties, often beyond its control. The framework is based on the
recognition that the actual inflation rate will on occasions depart from its target as a result of
shocks and disturbances. Attempts to keep inflation at the inflation target in these
circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output”.

BIS Review 36/2008

1

The time lag between changes in interest rates and their impact on inflation means that the
MPC can have little effect on the short-term path of inflation. What is crucial is that the pickup
proves to be temporary, just as the rise in inflation last year was. As commodity prices
stabilise, inflation will fall back towards our target next year. But that does not mean we can
ignore the pickup in inflation that is now underway. In judging how far inflation is likely to fall
back next year, we have to gauge the extent to which high inflation in the short term will enter
the expectations of those setting prices and pay. If it does so, then without some margin of
spare capacity, inflation will have some tendency to persist above the target.
Our inflation target is symmetric. We are not aiming for inflation below 2%, but at 2%. So
even though some slowdown in the growth rate of economic activity is likely to be necessary
to ensure that inflation returns to the target, we cannot allow the economy to slow too
sharply, lest a margin of spare capacity is produced that pulls inflation down below the target
next year. We face a difficult balancing act.
Why should we not focus on growth for a while and forget about inflation? The answer is that
once higher inflation becomes entrenched, it may be costly to dislodge. Past UK recessions
were associated not with slowdowns in the world economy, but with attempts to squeeze
inflation out of the UK economy. The best thing that we can do to promote economic stability
is to avoid inflation, and inflation expectations, from becoming dislodged from the target in
the first place.
The most important function of an independent central bank is its role in monetary policy.
Price stability is a necessary foundation of economic stability more generally. But central
banks around the world are also called upon to engage, to a greater or lesser extent, in the
supervision of financial institutions. Unlike monetary policy, where in large part a common
framework prevails around the world, there is no uniformity in the roles played by central
banks in the supervision of the financial system.
The supervision of financial institutions is sometimes regarded as part of the functions of a
central bank and sometimes given to one or more other regulatory bodies. It is striking how
varied are the arrangements in different countries. In the United Kingdom, an important
ingredient in the 1997 reforms which took banking supervision away from the Bank of
England and handed it to a single regulatory body, the Financial Services Authority, was the
view that it was no longer sensible to try to distinguish commercial banks from investment
banks, and banks from securities companies. A common regulatory framework was needed.
There are, however, important differences between prudential supervision and “conduct” of
business regulation, so some countries have adopted a “twin peaks” solution in which the
central bank is responsible for prudential supervision and conduct of business regulation is
given to a different body.
This is evidence that the appropriate division of responsibilities will depend on local
circumstances. One of the most important of those is the number of institutions which merit
supervision. In a country with a limited number of banks it is less clear that a separate
supervisor is needed and the central bank may well be able to take this responsibility on
without risk to its reputation or of other contagion to its primary monetary policy
responsibilities. In contrast to monetary policy, where the appropriate institutional framework
is common to all countries, there is unlikely to be uniformity in the roles played by central
banks in the supervision of the financial system.
Regardless of where responsibility for regulation lies, it is hard to imagine taking steps either
to prevent, or to deal with, the consequences of a financial crisis without the active
involvement of the central bank. Central banks are currently at the heart of efforts to restore
confidence in the banking system by the provision of liquidity against assets which have
proved to be highly illiquid. But the recent challenges presented by the latest episode of
financial turmoil suggest that much hard thought will need to be given to the structure and
nature of banking regulation in the future. In the longer-term, it seems extremely likely that
banks and other “near” banks, especially those that have been regarded as similar to banks

2

BIS Review 36/2008

in terms of their eligibility for financial assistance, will be called upon to hold more capital and
a greater quantity of liquid assets than hitherto. It is too early to foresee clearly where the
long-term direction will go. But serious thinking and a willingness to contemplate radical
change will be necessary.

BIS Review 36/2008

3

Paul Tucker: Monetary policy and the financial system
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy
Committee of the Bank of England, at the Institutional Money Market Funds Association
Annual Dinner, London, 2 April 2008.
*

*

*

Alongside many others, the money market fund industry has for months now been grappling
with turmoil and fragility across financial markets. It continues to pose serious challenges for
all of us, and so I shall use this evening to summarise briefly a few of the strands in my own
thinking about monetary policy and the financial system.
Monetary policy
First, monetary policy. The tightening of credit conditions domestically and internationally
makes it likely that aggregate demand will slow, with a risk that it will slow considerably.
There is, in consequence, a meaningful downwards threat to inflation over the medium term.
Usually, the MPC would respond by cutting Bank Rate sufficiently to offset more or less
entirely what we judged, over time, to be the impact of the tighter financial conditions on the
path of spending, so as to ensure that aggregate demand remained broadly in line with the
economy’s productive capacity. But conditions do not favour such a “business as usual”
approach to demand management. That is because, alongside those downside risks to
inflation, there are also upside risks to inflation over the medium term – and I am stressing
“medium term” – stemming from the rise in commodity prices and the decline in sterling’s
exchange rate. In the near term, CPI inflation is very likely to rise to materially above our 2%
target. The question is whether that unavoidable temporary rise will remain just that,
temporary; or whether it will feed into medium-term expectations of inflation, and so get
reflected in wages and prices going forward and, thus, in domestically-generated inflation.
Given this unusual combination of significant downside and upside risks to the medium-term
inflation outlook, the broad policy strategy is to offset some but not all of the adverse shock to
demand from tighter credit conditions. And to do so by changing Bank Rate gradually and
with transparency about that broad strategy. To be clear, this approach probably means
allowing a degree of slack to develop in the economy, in the interests of avoiding taking risks
with inflation on the upside. Only by underpinning the credibility of the nominal anchor
provided by the MPC’s commitment to the inflation target will we maintain scope to cushion
the real economy from the effects of the stresses in the international financial system. If we
implement this strategy successfully, we will be able to provide more durable support for
demand and activity.
If, by contrast, we were to adopt a course that let the inflation genie out of the bottle, we
would find ourselves needing to tighten policy, exacerbating the slowdown in activity.
That broad strategy is not a recipe for inaction. The central projection in February’s Inflation
Report was for inflation to return to close to the 2% target over the coming two to three years,
conditional on the market’s expectation of further cuts in Bank Rate. But nor does the
strategy determine a definite path for Bank Rate over the coming months. Each of us on the
MPC must form a judgment month by month on which of the risks to the inflation outlook –
from financial conditions or from rising costs – is proving more potent, and so a judgment on
the degree to which we can set a course that underpins demand.
Since the February Inflation Report, oil prices are around 10% higher, and sterling’s
exchange rate around 4% lower, so the immediate cost pressures are worse. The good news
is that, in the labour market, nominal earnings growth has so far remained subdued,
notwithstanding the rise in near-term inflation expectations revealed by a range of surveys.

BIS Review 38/2008

1

This is perhaps suggestive of the adjustment in real take-home pay made necessary by the
sharp increase in firms’ costs due to the further rises in commodity prices. In manufacturing,
firms’ input costs have risen sharply over the past twelve months; and output price inflation
has reached nearly 6%. A big question is to what extent competition amongst retailers will
dampen the pass through into retail prices. Anecdotally, retailers still sound as though they
are competing fiercely on prices, and driving down other costs in order to maintain their
margins.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the ledger, many essentially backward-looking indicators of
UK real demand and activity have held up reasonably well. But we should not yet place great
weight on that. It can sometimes take time for disturbances to affect real economic activity. In
the United States, arguably there was quite a lag between the onset of problems in housing
finance and the pass through to spending. The UK looks to be quite a lot better than the US.
The latest data for Q4 last year did, however, suggest that household spending on durables
slowed quite significantly. And we are seeing softening in consumer confidence and property
market conditions. So the picture on the real economy is mixed.
What is clear is that credit conditions are unambiguously tighter than two months ago,
underlining that source of downside risk to the outlook for demand and inflation. In retail
lending markets, banks have raised the interest rates charged (relative to Bank Rate) on new
lending, but they have all been doing much the same and many borrowers seem to have
been willing to pay the extra. In consequence, banks generally may not have achieved their
desired conservation of balance sheet capacity, and we are now seeing the withdrawal of
some lending products.
And in wholesale markets, the spread between the price that the banks themselves pay for
funds, roughly LIBOR, and the expected central bank policy rate has, again, widened
significantly over the past couple of months across the major international markets. Many
financial contracts are linked closely to three-month LIBOR so, other things being equal, the
increase in money market spreads has the effect of reducing the level of Bank Rate
consistent with unchanged monetary conditions.
At the Committee’s March meeting, I judged that an immediate further cut, following
February’s, might very easily have been misunderstood as a change of strategy away from
the one focused on the medium-term outlook for inflation that I have spelled out this evening.
My own vote at the April meeting will depend on all the data, some of it still to reach us, since
then.
Financial system deleveraging: legacy portfolios
Whatever path monetary policy takes in the UK in the months ahead, it is clear that the
process of deleveraging in the financial system is not complete. Some asset prices embody a
hefty discount for the current illiquidity in markets, which feeds into the accounting measure
of financial firms’ capitalisation, and so into perceptions of counterparty credit risk and money
market conditions. In consequence, there remains a risk that credit creation – the lubricant
that the financial system provides to the real economy – will be further impaired. Several
features of our financial system lie behind this, and I want to touch on just a few of them.
Financial markets have swung from a prolonged period of underpricing risk to now plausibly
overpricing risk on at least some products. And yet, one might think perversely, we have also
swung from an over abundant supply of credit to a much more restrictive supply of new
credit. The global insurance industry provides an interesting contrast with banking in this
respect. For sure, it too is capable of systematically misjudging risks. But when a shift in risk
appreciation and pricing occurs, the reinsurance industry often separates the run off of old
portfolios containing mispriced contracts from the establishment of new vehicles, capitalised
separately to take advantage of attractive terms on new business. And for regular insurance,
many contracts are annual, so adversely priced business can run off fairly quickly. Banking

2

BIS Review 38/2008

typically works quite differently. Banks around the world are carrying portfolios of term loans
that are the legacy of the boom years. There is uncertainty – amongst banks’ management,
shareholders and funders – about the degree of fundamental impairment in those portfolios.
New loans are booked to the same balance sheets. And so many banks face a choice
between, on the one hand, conserving capital and liquidity to support legacy portfolios; and,
on the other hand, deploying capital and liquidity to write new business on what some see as
the attractive terms and conditions now available. The banking system simply is not
structured routinely to insulate new business from the legacy of past mistakes; funding and
capital are fungible.
This predicament may be exacerbated by other features of the current environment.
One is an apparent reluctance on the part of banks to raise fresh capital except where the
market thinks that it is beyond doubt that they need to do so. Given the feedback from credit
conditions to asset prices and the real economy and so potentially to banks’ future earnings,
it might seem slightly odd for banks internationally to be maintaining distributions to
shareholders but tightening credit availability in order to preserve resources. This has to be
seen in the wider context.
One possible explanation for banks holding back from raising fresh capital is that they may
want to avoid giving an adverse signal about themselves. If there is a co-ordination problem,
the regulatory authorities internationally should be able to tackle it, allied to ensuring prudent
valuations of legacy portfolios. But another possible explanation is that, like some other
market participants, bankers may believe that many legacy assets are fundamentally
undervalued at present and that the markets for securitised assets will, with time, recover
and reopen. On that view, banks are avoiding becoming overcapitalised on a fundamentals
(or forward looking) basis, and so setting off another expansionary phase in the credit cycle,
a little further down the road. The serious puzzle which that underlines is why there is a
dearth of buyers for the supposedly undervalued paper. With the terms and availability of
financing from banks and dealers having tightened, levered funds are hardly likely to be the
US Cavalry. But it is interesting that there has not been more interest from investment
institutions with ostensibly long holding periods, which are largely unlevered and are not
exposed to liquidity risk from borrowing short and lending long. What we commonly hear
from contacts is that investment managers do not want to be caught out if asset prices fall
further before they recover. But no one can seriously believe that they can spot the bottom of
the market, and short-term horizons should not weigh heavily in longer-term investment
institutions. All of which suggests that there may be structural impediments. Those could
include some combination of the reasonable difficulty that some asset managers experience
in assessing the quality of securitised assets; and mandates and accounting policies that
may have the effect of shortening asset managers’ time horizons.
The challenge for your own industry seems to have been slightly different. The managers of
some money funds around the world, although I am sure not all of your members, joined in
the “search for yield” by going down the credit spectrum and increasing maturity mismatch
during the boom in credit markets. As those funds have moved back towards home base,
shortening the maturity and increasing the liquidity of their assets, one effect has been a
reduction in the net supply of term funding into the international banking system.
That has been one of many contributors to the liquidity strains evident in money markets. But
those strains have also been exacerbated by an unexpected breakdown in the technology for
liquidity insurance provided by central banks.
For well over a century, throughout industrialised world there has in effect been something
akin to a Social Contract between the banking system and the authorities. The banking
system is permitted to profit from undertaking leveraged maturity transformation in the course
of intermediating the liquid savings of depositors into illiquid loans to households, firms and
others. In doing so, commercial banks provide liquidity insurance, whether via demand
deposits or committed lines of credit. They can do this because their deposit liabilities are

BIS Review 38/2008

3

money, which puts them at the heart of the payments system and is what makes them
special; banks are at the heart of a monetary economy. In return, the authorities respond with
a combination of prudential supervision, to contain the risks that banks run; deposit
insurance, to protect savers; and liquidity insurance from the central bank. Smaller
commercial banks can try to buy liquidity insurance from their larger brethren. Large banks
cannot realistically do the same. But there is no cast iron guarantee that asset markets will
remain liquid in all conditions. So since Bagehot’s day, central banks have stood ready to
provide unlimited liquidity against good collateral at a rate that is higher than the normal
market rate. However, during the period of turmoil since last summer it has proved toxic,
here and overseas, for banks to access liquidity on those terms from central banks unless in
broad and quality company. That has created uncertainty about the access of banks to the
central banks in practice, and has required innovation and clear assurances from the central
banking community. This alone will require reforms to the way in which central banks use
their balance sheets, and money creating power, to sustain financial stability.
Banks will also need to adapt. It seems that at not a few firms, the discipline of risk
management somehow got separated from that of balance sheet management (or funding).
It was effectively assumed that financing markets would remain open come what may. There
is a question of whether treasury management should somehow be insulated from the
pressures of a profit centre. Separately, assumptions were made about relationships
between asset prices that have proved groundless. One such is the spread between term
money market rates and expected central bank policy rates. So long as the so-called
LIBOR/Overnight Index Swap spread was narrow at all maturities, few market participants
cared about whether they hedged against a LIBOR-based instrument when in fact
sometimes they really needed a hedge relative to a risk-free rate. We sense that some
international fixed-income asset managers would like there to be OIS-based contracts
alongside LIBOR-based financial contracts, so that they can tailor their hedges more
precisely. There should be wider benefits from contracts based purely on the risk-free rate
rather than embodying liquidity premia and credit-risk premia of various kinds. That is
something for the industry.
But better liquidity-insurance technology and better risk management will not abolish the
credit cycle. Looking further ahead, the big question will be whether the authorities can tame
the credit cycle without sacrificing the incentives to enterprise that are so important in a
dynamic economy. The debate about the micro regulation of banks will need to take account
of whether or not we can deliver that macroprudential objective. For too long, the debate has
got sidetracked. Into whether we can rely on monetary policy “mopping up” after bubbles
burst. Or into whether monetary policy could be used to control asset prices as well as doing
its orthodox job of steering nominal trends in the economy, which I should say can include
taking account of prospective risks of inflation volatility over the medium term. Ideas
circulating already include minimum margin requirements or capital ratios that vary not only
across firms but also through time as credit conditions change. We need calmly to explore
whether there are also other possibilities. But let me make this absolutely clear: there are
formidable obstacles to finding a solution. In the monetary sphere, a regime of floating
exchange rates allows individual countries to pursue their own domestic monetary objectives.
But in a world in which capital flows freely, local attempts to control the pace of credit
creation, particularly within the financial system, may not work. All of that will need to be
thought through. But first we need to concentrate on the immediate challenges.
Summary
In a speech four months ago, I stressed that “we must try to avoid a vicious circle in which
tighter liquidity conditions, lower asset values, impaired capital resources, reduced credit
supply, and slower aggregate demand feed back on each other”. I identified monetary policy,
liquidity policy, and regulatory capital policy as being amongst the instruments the authorities
would need to use. That remains the case, as the stress in the global financial system has

4

BIS Review 38/2008

continued and, in the US at least, evidence of a feedback loop is apparent. Each of those
instruments is constrained in some degree. That underlines the need for close co-operation
between the authorities and the industry, and internationally.

BIS Review 38/2008

5

Nigel Jenkinson: Strengthening regimes for controlling liquidity risk –
some lessons from the recent turmoil
Speech by Mr Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at
the Euromoney Conference on Liquidity and Funding Risk Management, London,
24 April 2008.
I am very grateful to Emily Beau for her collaboration on this speech, and to Adrian Chiu, Andrew Bailey, John
Gieve, Laurie Roberts and Forrest Capie for help and comments.

*

*

*

Section I: Introduction
Commercial banks play a pivotal role in the economy. They facilitate payments and the
smooth transfer of goods and services, and they match savers who may lack detailed
knowledge of borrowers and who (generally) want to be able to withdraw their money at short
notice, with borrowers who often wish to repay their loans over a longer term horizon. This
“maturity transformation” performed by banks is essential to allow capital to be invested in a
productive way to support economic growth. But by offering such maturity transformation,
banks are inherently exposed to liquidity risk – the risk that a bank is unable to meet its
commitments should depositors attempt to withdraw their funds ahead of the bank’s capacity
to repay them.
As many bankers through the ages have found to their cost, the key objective for the
management of liquidity risk is the retention of confidence. A bank may be well-capitalised
and profitable with a sound loan book, but if depositors lose confidence in the bank’s ability
to provide their funds as and when they request them, the crystallisation of liquidity risk can
bring down an otherwise viable institution in short order. Once underway, a liquidity crisis can
be very hard to stop. Adverse dynamics may feed back on themselves as the limited offer of
immediate, full repayment awaits those first to the exit. Moreover, liquidity risk can be
triggered through the realisation of other risks, such as the disclosure of large and
unexpected trading losses, or the discovery of fraudulent activity within the bank. But it is just
as likely to develop independently through the simple combination of an inherently vulnerable
funding position and a sudden (and not necessarily rational) turn in market sentiment.
These considerations illustrate why it is of crucial importance to build strong defences
against this risk, particularly as the macro-economic and financial market developments of
the past few years have in my view led to an increase in many banks’ overall vulnerability to
liquidity risk. And whilst this changing environment has led to distinct improvements in banks’
efficiency and management of other risks, liquidity risk management and supervision have
not always kept pace. Recent events have clearly demonstrated that the current defences
have proved wanting, with banks insufficiently prepared for a period of severe liquidity strain.
The experience of the past few months already suggests a number of key lessons for
liquidity risk management and supervision which I will cover later. But I would first like to
review the impact of market developments in recent years for liquidity risk management.
Section II: Changing environment and business models
How then has the financial environment changed in the past few years, and why has this led
to a greater vulnerability to liquidity risk? The decade leading up to July 2007 has been
described as a period of great stability: around the world, economic conditions were
dominated by low inflation, low nominal yields, and lower volatility of the economic cycle. The
benign macro background was associated with a fall in financial market volatility. And
advances in technology spurred a wave of financial innovation and the development of new
products offering improvements in the tailoring and matching of risks to investors’ risk

BIS Review 50/2008

1

appetite. This combination of factors encouraged investors to seek out riskier investments in
search of higher returns – the “search for yield”.
One feature of this “search for yield” was the rapid expansion of structured financial
instruments; for example, where individual loans are packaged into tradable securities, such
as residential or commercial mortgage-backed securities (RMBS/CMBS), or where the risk of
a pool of loans is packaged into complex securities offering different levels of exposure to the
potential losses in the pool (a collateralised debt obligation – CDO). Moreover, new products
emerged which also supported the transfer, hedging and dispersion of risks, such as credit
derivatives. And the use of these instruments strengthened the inter-relationships between
financial market participants across the globe: greater integration of markets went hand in
hand with the acceleration of financial innovation and rapid growth of market activity.
These developments helped stimulate important changes in banks’ business models.
Constraints on growth were eased as funding sources widened. Many banks took advantage
of new sources of wholesale funding available from securitisation – the packaging of loans
into instruments which could be sold on in financial markets. In many cases, assets were
routinely transferred into off-balance sheet vehicles which funded themselves through assetbacked commercial paper, with the sponsoring bank providing a back-up liquidity line. By
applying this “originate and distribute” model, banks tapped a new source of funding on a
large scale. More traditional and stable sources of funding, such as retail deposits, declined
in importance (Chart 1). In addition, many banks saw opportunities to generate new sources
of revenue and fee income by developing and deepening their activities in international
capital markets.
Innovation has provided banks with greater opportunities to hedge and diversify risks. For
example, a regionally-based bank in country A can easily lower its geographical
concentration, for example by selling credit risk to other investors who had not previously
been able to access such exposures, and/or by purchasing exposure to credit risk
elsewhere. The resulting dispersal of risk allows banks to diversify their risk profile as well as
their sources of revenue. Providing that the gain from diversification outweighs the increased
cost of credit assessment, as banks take on exposure to entities where they have no banking
relationship, and that risks are priced fully and appropriately, such innovation should improve
market efficiency and lower the cost of intermediation and of capital.
These changes in the financial environment, however, resulted in banks increasing their
exposure to liquidity risk. Banks originated large volumes of long-term loans in the
expectation that they could be quickly and readily sold on, but leaving them with additional
funding risks if they could not. Contingent liquidity lines to securitisation conduits and special
purpose vehicles rose rapidly with little expectation that they would be drawn. Exposures to
higher yielding complex structured products rose, with market participants failing to recognise
sufficiently that the high yields offered by such products were in part compensation for higher
liquidity and market risk and that prospective risk-adjusted returns were much lower than
might first appear from their short historic track record. Moreover, in buoyant market
conditions, the compensation for liquidity risk itself was bid down to negligible levels by early
2007 (Chart 2). By that stage, many market participants recognised that compensation for
risk-taking was too low, but judged that the business risks of exiting lines outweighed the
financial risks of continuing to write new business. 1 Firms became over-confident in their
ability to hedge or exit positions if conditions changed, failing to recognise that many
participants would be attempting to do the same and that market liquidity would then
evaporate. Indeed, given a change in sentiment, the increased integration of financial
markets transmits risks just as much as it disperses them.

1

2

See Bank of England Financial Stability Reports July 2006 and April 2007.

BIS Review 50/2008

Banks’ funding thus became increasingly vulnerable to a sudden shift in financial market
conditions. As covered extensively elsewhere, 2 the crystallisation of this risk in August 2007
led to a sharp decline in liquidity across a wide range of markets (as shown in Chart 3).
Funding pressures intensified as asset managers lowered demand for asset-backed
securities and complex products more broadly, to lower risks and to guard against pressures
from their investors for early redemption. And as banks attempted to fund contingent claims,
liquidity in wholesale term markets dried up – adding to the strain. A number of institutions
across the globe, such as Northern Rock, IKB and Bear Stearns have succumbed to the
pressure, necessitating public sector intervention to support financial stability.
Section III: Defences against liquidity risks
Banks have a range of defences to a sudden decline in the availability of wholesale funds.
Recent developments have highlighted a number of limitations in these defences in
addressing the recent system-wide liquidity shock.
One potential counter-measure to liquidity pressures is to transform illiquid assets into cash.
So in the event of increased funding pressures, a number of banks had planned to use
securitisation techniques more intensively to liquefy assets such as mortgages. Such a
counter-measure may well succeed if a single firm faces a liquidity problem on its own. But of
course this approach fails completely when the source of the change in market conditions is
a lowering of global demand for securitised products and a widespread closure of term
lending markets.
Another approach is to bid for higher retail deposits. That is likely to take time as many
individual retail savers react only slowly to changes in relative interest rates and as banks
offer higher rates on term deposits to limit their movement. More importantly, this approach
can only succeed by offering rates above those of competitors, thereby eroding margins. And
in an environment of general liquidity strain, competitors are likely to follow suit to protect
their market share. So the impact on each bank in the medium term is likely to be limited to a
share in any rise in aggregate retail savings.
Faced with restrictions on raising liquidity, a bank must respond to a funding shortfall by
acting on the asset side of its balance sheet to lower its financing need: in other words, by
slowing or even reducing its lending to households and corporate customers. This policy will
ease funding pressures and boost liquidity, but it has two major drawbacks. The first is that it
takes time to take effect. Many lending decisions are agreed weeks or months in advance
and cannot be readily reversed. So the approach will not stem a very fast drainage of
liquidity. Moreover, as one bank tightens lending conditions to restrict balance sheet growth,
other banks facing similar pressure will react to limit any additional diversion of funding
pressure onto their own balance sheets. The second is that a retrenchment in lending can
have significant implications for the wider economy, as fewer funds are available to
companies and households to support long-term investment and consumption. We are
seeing some signs of that beginning to occur as highlighted in the most recent Bank of
England Credit Conditions Survey.
These defences suffer from a common shortcoming. While they may work well when one
bank is facing funding pressure on its own, when liquidity pressures are widespread every
bank will attempt to use them at the same time. The actions of one bank will work to negate
those of a competitor in these circumstances as gains and losses of market share will net
out. That implies an increase in the economy-wide costs of adjustment, posing increased
risks to financial stability during the adjustment process.

2

See, for example, Bank of England: Financial Stability Report October 2007.

BIS Review 50/2008

3

There is, however, one last line of defence left. A bank holding a buffer of reliable high quality
liquid assets, such as Treasury bills or other government securities, can draw on them
immediately and directly in the event of a sudden withdrawal of market liquidity or an
unexpected increase in its funding requirement. Of course, safe, liquid assets offer lower
returns than other types of assets, so there is an opportunity cost in maintaining such a
liquidity cushion on the balance sheet. But such assets nevertheless provide the most readily
available and reliable provision against a crystallisation of liquidity risk.
Unfortunately, banks’ reserves of reliable liquid assets have proved insufficient to meet the
recent funding shock. With hindsight, incentives to raise the efficiency of maturity
transformation have lowered this safety valve in the system too far.
I would like to examine in a little more detail the UK experience in this respect. In the midnineteenth century, UK banks held on average sixty percent of liquid assets as a proportion
of total deposits, an extremely high ratio explained by the frequency of liquidity crises around
that time. Shortly after the 1866 Overend and Gurney crisis, the Bank of England accepted a
role as lender of last resort, leading banks to relax their extremely conservative (and
inefficient) approach to liquidity. The average liquidity ratio dropped to around thirty percent
of total deposits. The first agreement on liquidity between the Bank of England and private
banks occurred in 1947, and involved a requirement to hold a minimum liquid assets ratio of
thirty-two percent (lowered to twenty-eight percent sixteen years later). The regime prevailed
until 1971, when the Competition and Credit Controls Act (CCC) introduced a minimum
reserve ratio of twelve and a half percent. The CCC had two objectives: first it was intended
to strengthen control over monetary policy, by creating a solid money base to underpin it;
second, it aimed to unify restrictions on banks to strengthen competition in the industry. The
minimum reserve ratio was designed with this aim in mind, and this perhaps took priority over
any desire to impose prudential liquidity reserves.
While CCC undoubtedly liberalised the UK banking sector and thus supported improvements
in competition and efficiency, it led to a fall in very high quality sterling liquid asset holdings of
UK banks, as shown in Chart 4. After twice lowering the minimum requirement, the Bank of
England finally replaced the reserve ratio regime with the cash ratio deposit regime in 1981,
which did not directly require a minimum level of liquid assets. The Sterling Stock Liquidity
Regime (SLR) in 1996 focused on holding sufficient liquidity to meet a particular severe cash
flow funding stress. It is calibrated to ensure that a bank has enough highly liquid assets to
meet its outflows for the first week of a liquidity crisis without recourse to the market for
renewed wholesale funding, in order to allow the authorities time to explore options for an
orderly resolution. It was designed as one component of a wider crisis management regime,
and not as a means for a bank to manage its precautionary buffer for addressing liquidity
strain on a going concern basis 3 .
Chart 4 shows how actual liquid reserves fell in line with minimum requirement levels until
1981, and continued to decline afterwards, albeit more slowly. Clearly, over this same period,
banks also diversified their liquid asset holdings to include other currencies, and started
using repo markets extensively. So the chart may exaggerate the decline somewhat.
Nonetheless, the overall historical pattern has clearly been one of a marked secular decline
in cushions of high quality liquid assets. Similar trends also prevailed in countries other than
the UK, such as the US, Canada and Sweden. 4 And focusing on the past decade, whilst
holdings of very high quality liquid assets have remained relatively stable, they have not
increased to match banks’ rising vulnerability to liquidity risk described above.

3

See Financial Services Authority: “Review of the liquidity requirements for banks and building societies”
Discussion Paper 07/7. December 2007. The UK regime is under review.

4

See Goodhart, C.A.E. (2008), “Liquidity and Money Market Operations: A Proposal”, London School of
Economics, mimeo.

4

BIS Review 50/2008

Section IV: Lessons
The recent turmoil has highlighted clear deficiencies in banks’ liquidity risk management. And
it has also demonstrated that these deficiencies pose serious risks to financial stability and
thus to the economy more broadly.
To address this risk in the near term, central banks globally have provided additional liquidity
to the banking system and emergency operations have been conducted to support Northern
Rock and Bear Stearns. Additional liquidity has been provided at longer-term maturities to
address the problem of funding an unexpected overhang of illiquid assets. The Bank’s
recently launched Special Liquidity Scheme is enabling UK banks to liquefy a proportion of
their outstanding stock of illiquid assets by swapping them for high quality liquid government
securities, while ensuring that credit risks remain very clearly with the banks. That should
ease current funding pressures.
But in the medium term, it is clear that action is needed to strengthen the financial system’s
defences to liquidity risk to limit the likelihood of any recurrence of the recent problems.
Central banks globally are reviewing the lessons of the episode for their market operations,
for example, to ensure that the usefulness of facilities is not undermined by perceptions of
stigma that may be attached to a bank that uses them. But it is clear that primary
responsibility for bolstering the defences lies with the banks themselves and that supervisory
regimes for liquidity risk need reinforcing to support that process.
I would like to highlight four emerging lessons from the current crisis that should help prevent
future problems. First, we need to understand better the various sources of liquidity risk,
particularly under stressed conditions. Second, banks need to develop more effective
contingency funding plans. Third, banks should support improved market functioning and
stricter market discipline through better disclosure. And finally, supervision should ensure
that banks’ liquidity risk management is undertaken to a more robust standard, in order to
internalise some of the costs of a bank failure on the wider financial system. I shall cover
these briefly in turn.
Banks and public authorities alike need to develop a more in-depth and more complete
understanding of the various forms in which liquidity risk can arise. That requires both a
careful analysis of the various potential sources of liquidity risk, and of how such risks may
crystallise under stressed market conditions. As outlined earlier, in today’s financial
environment, it is not just the simple maturity transformation between deposits and loans that
generates liquidity risk for banks. To this must be added contingent risks, such as the
potential activation of liquidity lines to off-balance sheet vehicles, or the drawing of committed
facilities extended to corporate customers. Contingent risks may also arise, in a variety of
forms, from complex trading instruments, as detailed well by the Institute for International
Finance (IIF) last year. 5 Yet more sources of potential funding pressure have emerged from
greater activity in capital markets, such as the pipeline risk that arises from being unable to
offload leveraged loans and warehouses of loans awaiting securitisation when unfavourable
market conditions prevail. And banks are also subject to the risk of exposures previously
passed on to third parties flowing back to them, for example when sub-prime residential
mortgage-backed securities are “put back” to the originator should they be found to breach
certain credit criteria. Finally, banks are also exposed to the risks of a decline in asset market
liquidity and falls in market prices through the potential for higher collateral or margin
requirements. These may substantially raise the level of funding a bank requires on a day-today basis.

5

Institute for International Finance: “Principles of Liquidity Risk Management” March 2007.

BIS Review 50/2008

5

As emphasised in a recent report by the Senior Supervisors Group, 6 banks need to develop
a comprehensive approach to the management of liquidity risk to ensure that it is in line with
the bank’s overall risk appetite. One strong recommendation in the report is that financial
organisations develop and apply a systematic policy of internal charging for liquidity risk. In
particular, banks need to ensure that risk decisions made by front office traders price
appropriately the liquidity risk generated by new products and business lines, rather than
treating it as a “free good” or overhead to be managed centrally by the treasury function.
Furthermore, banks and supervisors should analyse in far greater depth how the wide range
of liquidity risks may crystallise, separately or conjointly, in a stressed market environment.
Rigorous stress testing should span individual, group-wide and market-wide scenarios. There
is considerable scope for much better consideration of likely system-wide interactions,
including the potential impact of “crowded trades” being unwound, the dynamics of liquidity
hoarding, and the risks of signalling weakness and thus losing market confidence and
funding lines. Stress scenarios should test properly for the outright closure of funding
markets, and explore the possibility of several markets being shut concurrently. Finally,
testing should consider longer horizons, to cater for the possibility that a liquidity crisis could
persist for some time. These are just some of the areas which could be considered in more
detail – clearly banks, supervisors and central banks all have much to learn with regards to
the design of appropriately demanding and comprehensive stress scenarios.
Recent events have also highlighted the need to devise considerably tougher contingency
plans. Closer integration with stress tests will help firms develop more reliable and robust
responses to future episodes of strain. Experience has highlighted the need to improve
resilience to a sharp decline in market liquidity and to demonstrate that firms can survive the
closure of one or more funding markets by ensuring that finance can be readily raised from a
variety of sources. Consideration should clearly be given to boosting holdings of very high
quality liquid assets that can provide reliable reserves under all conditions. And it is important
that plans are legally robust and that they are regularly tested.
Another lesson from the recent episode is that disclosure practices in relation to liquidity risk
management objectives, controls and metrics vary significantly. In some cases banks go as
far as providing information on stress tests and contingency funding plans; in others there is
a relative paucity of information. That hampers market functioning: in times of heightened
uncertainty a lack of information can lead to defensive reactions by market counterparties
that provision of additional information could prevent. There are some risks from greater
disclosure. For example, a bank revealing a weak funding position could precipitate an
adverse reaction, although that should of course lead to stronger risk management as a
precaution against that risk. There are also measurement challenges. It is difficult to present
a simple, representative summary measure of liquidity risks run by a given bank – any single
definition of such a complex array of risks will necessarily be approximate. But that does not
seem a sufficient reason not to disclose any measure – indeed there may be some parallels
with market risk where a single metric such as a firm’s overall value-at-risk is not viewed as
encapsulating all dimensions of such risk. Nonetheless, the degree of disclosure on market
risks which banks are now providing under Pillar 3 of the Basel II Accord marks a definite
improvement in this area. While liquidity risk metrics remain complex and challenging, I
believe that there is scope over time to achieve some degree of enhanced, consistent
disclosure across institutions.
The final lesson is the need for stronger oversight of banks’ liquidity risk management
practices. The authorities’ role is to preserve financial stability by lowering the probability and
impact of bank failures that could threaten the functioning of the financial system more
broadly through contagion, spillover and damage to financial networks. There is no incentive

6

6

Senior Supervisors Group: “Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market
Turbulence” March 2008.

BIS Review 50/2008

for private banks to bear this cost spontaneously, as their responsibility is to their
shareholders rather than to users of the financial system more broadly. The objective of
prudential supervision is to correct this misalignment between private incentives and public
policy goals, by forcing banks to deliver higher standards of liquidity risk management and to
build stronger defences than they would naturally provide of their own volition.
That leaves open the formidably difficult question of the level of resilience to liquidity stress
that the authorities should seek from individual banks. An answer to this question requires a
balance to be struck between the risks to financial stability if resilience is set too low, and the
risks of inefficiency of financial intermediation if buffers are set too high. Moreover, in
addressing this question the authorities also need to take into account that some actions
taken today to limit the likelihood and costs of financial instability if risks do crystallise may
lead agents to underinsure again future risks. They may thus raise the probability and
amplitude of future problems.
Resolving these issues raises major challenges for the global regulatory community given
the strong increase in financial market integration and the substantial growth in
internationally active banks. Action is underway internationally 7 as well as domestically 8 to
improve and strengthen the management and supervision of liquidity risk and to promote
greater consistency of approach. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is working
on producing revised Sound Practices for the management and supervision of liquidity risk.
These will be released for consultation in the early summer. The Committee of European
Bank Supervisors is undertaking work in parallel. The aim is to strengthen the platform for
the management and oversight of liquidity risk. Among other areas for improvement,
supervisors are driving higher standards for stress testing and subjecting contingency
funding plans to more rigorous cross-examination before they are validated.
Section V: Conclusion
To conclude, developments in financial markets have increased the importance and
complexity of liquidity risk management over the past decade. That, in turn, increased the
vulnerability of banks to a system-wide liquidity shock. Preparations for such a shock proved
inadequate and insufficient. But the recent experience already provides us with important
lessons both for banks and for public authorities and points to a clear need for action by both.

7

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision: “Liquidity Risk: Management and Supervisory Challenges”.
February 2008.

8

Financial Services Authority: “Review of the liquidity requirements for banks and building societies” Discussion
Paper 07/7. December 2007.

BIS Review 50/2008

7

Chart 1: Major UK Banks Customer Chart 2: Decomposition of sterling high-yield
Funding Gap(a)
corporate bond spreads(a)
R es id ual (includ ing co mp ens at io n fo r illiq uid it y)

Customer funding gap adjusted for
securitisation(b)

Basis point s

C o mp ens at io n fo r uncert aint y ab o ut d efault lo s s es

£ billions
700

Customer funding gap

1,200

C o mp ens at io n fo r exp ect ed d efault lo s s es
To t al

1,000

600
500

800

400

600

300

400

200

200
+
0
200

100
+
0 100
200
01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

Sources: Dealogic, published accounts and Bank
calculations.

Sources: Bloomberg, Merrill Lynch, Thomson Datastream
and Bank calculations.

(a) Data exclude Nationwide.

(a) Bank of England (2007), 'Decomposing corporate bond
spreads', Quarterly Bulletin, December, pages 533-37.

(b) Customer funding gap less securitised debt.
Where not available, stocks of securitisations are
estimated from issuance data.

8

BIS Review 50/2008

Chart 3: Financial market liquidity(a)

Chart 4: Sterling liquid assets relative to total
asset holdings of UK banking sector

Liquidity index
1.0

Definition of liquid assets:
Broad ratio: Cash + BoE balances + Money at call + Eligible bills + UK gilts
Reserve-ratio eligible assets

0.8

Narrow ratio: Cash + BoE balances + Eligible bills

0.6

35

0.2

+

0.0
0.2-

30
25
Cash ratio
deposits
(1981)

Sterling
Stock
Liquidity
Regime
(1996)

0.4
0.6

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

06

20
15
10

0.8

5

1.0

0
1967 1971 1975 1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007

08

Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg, Chicago
Board Options Exchange, Debt Management Office,
London Stock Exchange, Merrill Lynch, Thomson
Datastream and Bank calculations.

Percentage of total assets
(all currencies)

0.4

Competition
and Credit
Control
(1971)

Year

Sources: Bank of England data and calculations.

(a) The liquidity index shows the number of standard
deviations from the mean. It is a simple unweighted
average of nine liquidity measures, normalised on the
period 1999-2004. Data shown are an exponentially
weighted moving average. The indicator is more
reliable after 1997 as it is based on a greater number
of underlying measures.

BIS Review 50/2008

9

Mervyn King: Banking and the Bank of England
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the British Bankers
Association, London, Tuesday 10 June 2008.
*

*

*

After a decade or more of economic stability, we are now facing a period of rising inflation
and falling economic growth. Part of the reason for this change of economic weather is that
we are passing through the most prolonged period of financial turmoil that most of us can
remember. Whether, as the IMF has argued, it is the worst period of financial stress since the
1930s is too early to judge. After all, the crisis is not yet over.
Since last August there has been a great deal of soul-searching about what we all might
have done differently, both before and after 9 August when the crisis hit. And in
circumstances where livelihoods are at risk it was inevitable that the “blame game” was
played. Unfortunately, although such a game helped to fill newspaper columns, it generated
more heat than light. So today I want to step back.
Financial crises have been a regular, and disturbing, feature of our and other developed
economies for as long any one can remember. They are as frequent now as in the
nineteenth century, when Henry Thornton and Walter Bagehot were developing their ideas
about how central banks could prevent instability in the banking system. Are these repeated
crises the inevitable result of human nature at work in financial markets, with greed and fear
alternating as sentiment swings from irrational optimism to irrational pessimism? Or is it the
failure over many years to find the right incentive structure for banking markets? Or is it a
mixture of both?
I don’t pretend to be able to offer a complete answer to those questions. But I do want to
focus on the relationship between the Bank of England and the banks because it helps to
explain why crises occur and what we can do about them.
Let me start by saying that, although I do think the role of the Bank needs to be enhanced, it
would not be right for the Bank to take back banking supervision from the FSA, as some
have suggested. We should remember that the period before 1997, when FSA and the
“tripartite arrangements” were set up, was not seen at the time as a golden age of official
oversight of banks. Before 1997 the relationship between the Treasury and the Bank of
England in respect of banking supervision was often fraught. Remember too that the
experience which shaped the design of the 1997 settlement was that of idiosyncratic
problems in Johnson Matthey, BCCI and Barings, not a system-wide crisis affecting the
liquidity of the banking system as a whole. As a result, the tripartite Memorandum of
Understanding which underpinned that settlement was not so much faulty as incomplete.
Since the onset of the crisis last summer, the way in which the tripartite arrangements work
in practice has evolved considerably.
The concept of a golden age in the relationship between the Bank and the banks is also far
from the truth. Our relationship was described by David Kynaston, in his magisterial history of
the City, as “surprisingly prickly”. In the 1920s the Chairman of the Midland Bank, Reginald
McKenna, derided the Governor, Montagu Norman, as “an intellectual without an intellect”,
and in turn Norman said about McKenna, “some people cannot avoid the limelight”. Since the
crisis broke last August we too have had our differences, although more recently the close
cooperation between the Bank of England and six of the largest banks in working through the
details of our Special Liquidity Scheme was a model of effective collaboration.
But perhaps we should not be surprised that sometimes our relationship is “prickly” because
our interests do not always coincide. Banks are, entirely legitimately, concerned primarily
with their commercial interest. The Bank of England is concerned with the interests of the UK
economy as a whole. The two sets of interests are not always the same.

BIS Review 75/2008

1

Where they may clash is over the use of our balance sheet. Companies which have
misjudged risks or their business model should generally be allowed to fail to encourage
prudent behaviour by others. But the failure of a bank can have an impact that goes well
beyond the importance of that bank alone – so-called systemic risk. That is why central
banks have sometimes acted as “lender of last resort”. It can then be difficult for the
authorities to make a credible commitment that in future banks will be allowed to fail. And
that can in turn encourage banks to take greater risks – both in maturity transformation and
lending – enabling them to earn higher profits. Because the authorities will face an incentive
to step in to rescue banks tomorrow, there is an incentive for banks to take more risk today.
There is a parallel here with monetary policy. In their decisions today, people take into
account how interest rates will be set tomorrow, just as banks when taking risks anticipate
how central banks are likely to behave. In monetary policy we now have in place a
framework which makes the commitment to low inflation credible by delegating the
responsibility for achieving it to an independent central bank.
We need now to develop an equally strong framework for financial stability. It will be more
complex than for monetary policy where there is a single instrument – Bank Rate – which
can be delegated to a single decision-making body – the Monetary Policy Committee.
Financial stability requires cooperation among at least three sets of decisionmakers: the
supervisor, the central bank and the finance ministry. The existing tripartite framework needs
to develop so that the authorities are able to reduce systemic risk not just by effective
management of crises but by creating incentives for financial institutions to avoid excessive
risks.
Some of the elements of such a framework I described in my evidence to the Treasury
Committee on 20 September last year. In line with international experience, they included a
special resolution regime for failing banks, changes to deposit insurance to reduce the
incentives for bank runs, and a proper regime for the regulation of bank liquidity.
At the heart of the case for a special resolution regime is the need to find a way to allow
banks to fail in an orderly manner. As the Treasury Committee said in its report The Run on
the Rock, “Banks should be allowed to ‘fail’ so as to preserve market discipline on financial
institutions”. It is clear from the responses to the Consultation Document that there is
widespread acceptance of the basic case for a resolution regime. But that is tempered by
concerns about the details of its design. I want to highlight three key features that will be
central to the success of the new regime.
First, responsibility for resolving a failing bank should be delegated to a resolution authority
which should have a wide range of instruments available to help resolve a failing bank.
Which body assumes the role of the resolution authority is less important than the granting of
those powers to some body.
Second, the circumstances in which the regime would be triggered should be spelt out as
clearly as possible. It is unrealistic to imagine that entry to the regime could be triggered by
reference to quantitative triggers alone. Some discretion will be necessary. But the triggers
should contain some quantifiable measures for both capital and liquidity, and there should be
transparency in advance about their formulation to constrain the authorities’ discretion.
Moreover, looking ahead, although the regulator should have the leading role in triggering
the regime, no regulator, however effectively managed, can ever fully insulate itself against
the risk of forbearance which might delay a necessary resolution. That is why the Bank
believes that the resolution authority, wherever it is located, should have a powerful voice in
decisions on the use of the trigger. Moreover, any resolution authority will have a natural
interest in the timing of a decision to place a bank under its control.
Third, a clear framework for accountability should be established to give confidence that
decisions relating to the resolution regime are exercised in line with the objectives for the
regime set out in legislation.

2

BIS Review 75/2008

Turning to deposit insurance, I understand the concerns that many of you have voiced about
the reforms discussed in the tripartite Consultation Document. I know that you accept that to
avoid bank runs there will need to be 100% insurance of deposits – up to a limit. That limit
should not be too high. And in order to limit risk-taking by banks there is also a strong case
for relating the payments made by different banks to finance the insurance scheme to the
risks that they will fail. And in that context, some element of pre-funding is natural and is
used in many countries, including those with banking systems similar to our own, such as
Canada and Sweden. A degree of pre-funding is one of those ideas that is bound to be
unpopular before the fund is called upon, but seems decidedly wise after the event as it
lessens the burden on the banking system in a time of stress.
On the regulation of bank liquidity, the FSA has already issued a discussion paper, and I
support strongly the case for reform of liquidity regulation made this morning by Sir Callum
McCarthy. I very much hope that an international initiative to include liquidity in the Basel
capital regime, in which the Bank is playing a leading role, will come to fruition. For our own
part we, along with other central banks, have been reviewing the way in which our market
operations can alleviate stress in the banking system.
The primary objective of our money market operations is to ensure that the interest rate on
overnight lending in the market is close to the Bank Rate set by the Monetary Policy
Committee. That constrains the net amount of central bank money we lend to the system.
But we are also concerned with illiquidity in particular markets when it threatens the stability
of the system as a whole. It is this concern that motivates the choice of assets we lend
against in both normal and stressed conditions.
A loss of liquidity in markets on which the banking system as a whole relies can magnify the
mismatch between the maturity of assets and liabilities on banks’ balance sheets. A banking
system in which large volumes of funding need to be renewed very frequently is a fragile
one, vulnerable each day to a shock stemming from rumours and loss of confidence. And it is
in those circumstances that a backstop is needed. The reason for it is not to support
individual institutions. It is to avoid an unnecessary loss of confidence in the system as a
whole. That backstop is central bank funding when private markets important to the stability
of the system have temporarily closed.
But central banks are not there to support liquidity in all markets at all times. They are not
there to create a liquid market in all financial instruments that traders or some rocket scientist
have dreamt up. Nor are they there to maintain indefinitely a market when changes in
information or risk appetites make it more difficult to sustain a private market, as in some
asset-backed security markets recently.
It was concerns about confidence in the banking system as a whole that explain why the
major central banks acted together in December, which in our case meant extending the
range of collateral accepted in our regular auctions of 3-month lending. Auctions like this can
play a useful role but, as we saw with Bear Stearns, a more continuously available facility
may sometimes be needed to avoid an immediate loss of confidence. That is why, in April,
when confidence was particularly fragile, we introduced a backstop that is available every
day – the Special Liquidity Scheme.
As I said in September, in providing such a backstop, we face a balancing act, between
avoiding a major shock to the system and encouraging future reliance on the same cheap
but risky funding sources. The Special Liquidity Scheme aims to do this by exchanging liquid
for illiquid assets that existed only before the end of last year.
We intend to learn from the experience of the Scheme to put in place a liquidity facility that
works in all seasons – both ‘normal’ and ‘stressed’. It will be part of a set of reforms to our
Red Book, to be announced later this year. Any such facility will need to meet two
challenges: it will need the right pricing structure and it will need to overcome the ‘stigma’
problem that has affected access to all central banks during the current crisis.

BIS Review 75/2008

3

The pricing structure will be key to striking the right balance. It should vary according to the
type of collateral which banks provide, as indeed it does to some extent now. Access to
central bank money or asset swaps should, as far as possible, encourage banks to manage
liquidity risk prudently. Without the correct pricing structure, the incentives to encourage
future risk taking are obvious and potentially large.
Valuation margins – or haircuts – are used to protect our balance sheet. By themselves, they
aren’t sufficient to create a general pricing structure. The cost imposed by a margin depends
primarily on the difference between the costs of secured and unsecured funding, and that will
vary across banks and over time. So the key is in the interest rates charged by the central
bank.
The second challenge is to overcome the ‘stigma’ problem that has plagued the use of
central bank facilities throughout the crisis. Commercial banks have feared that, by
accessing funding from the central bank, they would acquire a ‘black spot’ in the market.
They have been reluctant to come to their central bank unless in good and extensive
company.
These are challenges that all major central banks are grappling with. They will not be easy to
overcome. But with our international colleagues we are aiming to devise a framework that
does so. The prize will be an integrated framework, covering all our lending to the banking
system and one that I hope, by making clear the terms on which liquidity will be provided in
times of stress, will focus the minds of banks long before those stresses emerge.
During my second term as Governor I would like to see us establish a framework for financial
stability that is on as sound a footing as the one we have successfully established for
monetary stability. The measures I have described would go a considerable way to achieving
that. But just as no framework for monetary policy can prevent shocks from hitting the UK
economy, we need to think carefully about why financial crises have been both persistent
and damaging.
That leads me to one final thought on which I want to end. For reasons of historical accident
we have created over many decades a financial system in which the incentives to monitor
risk-taking have been sharply reduced. It is often said that the role of a central bank is to take
the punch bowl away just as the party is getting going. That approach has served us well in
monetary policy. But all those efforts will come to naught if the opposite applies to the
financial sector. If banks feel they must keep on dancing while the music is playing and that
at the end of the party the central bank will make sure everyone gets home safely, then over
time the parties will become wilder and wilder.
That might not matter were the consequences limited to the party-goers. But they are not.
When the party ends, some innocent bystanders may lose their homes altogether. Moreover,
the party-goers aren’t just deposit-taking banks. A wide range of financial institutions,
including investment banks, monoline insurers, even hedge funds, have the potential to
cause significant damage to the rest of the economy in the wake of their demise. Are they all
to be helped to get home safely when the party ends? If so, will they all be regulated in the
same way as banks? If not, how can we limit the potential cost to the taxpayer? Add to this
the problem that many of these institutions are global in scope, but the responsibility for both
regulation and rescue remains firmly at national level, and you can see why policy-makers
get headaches as bad as the party-goers’.
No individual bank, or indeed the authorities, can easily find a way out of this because their
incentives are to continue in the same manner. There is, therefore, no point blaming anyone
for the outcomes. But together we have to find an answer. Of course, excessively strict and
detailed regulation would mean that there were no parties worth going to and the economy
as a whole would suffer from a suppressed and inefficient financial sector. That is why
requiring financial institutions to hold more capital to act as a shock absorber, while reducing
the procyclical nature of existing capital requirements, may offer a balance between
excessively burdensome regulation and excessive risk-taking.

4

BIS Review 75/2008

The proposals in the Banking Bill, and the other changes I have discussed today, will take us
an important step forward in the creation of a framework for financial stability. But they will
not be the final answer to a difficult, at times seemingly intractable, problem of how to change
the incentives of both private and public actors to reduce the frequency and cost of financial
crises. For that we will all need to do a lot more thinking. It is important that we do find the
right solution. An efficient and thriving banking sector which can intermediate saving and
investment, both domestically and internationally, is essential to our economic prosperity.

BIS Review 75/2008

5

Paul Tucker: A protracted “peacetime”
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy
Committee of the Bank of England, at the Chatham House Conference on “The new financial
frontiers”, London, 29 April 2008.
*

*

*

The turmoil and stress in the global financial system has now been going on for nine months
or more. Much has been said about the “wartime” conduct of the authorities, the banking
industry and asset managers. But the seeds of the current stresses, and many of the
remaining risks, lie in the preceding period of “peacetime”. The main purpose of my remarks
this morning is to underline that the community must not in the future lose sight of the need
to head off the risks that can creep up during a prolonged period of “peace”.
The recent period of peacetime was long enough for substantial macroeconomic imbalances
to build up, globally and domestically.
Long enough for innovations in financial intermediation to mask, from many, the degree of
leverage in the system.
Long enough for many to assume that funding structures could be chosen on the basis of
deep liquidity being maintained in a range of new asset markets.
Long enough for most with long memories to be tending their gardens.
Long enough for the international authorities to think they would get time to fix problems in
the regulatory capital regime before they gave rise to serious problems (such as the zeroweighting of 364-day lines of credit, which underlay the profusion of bank-like conduits etc).
Long enough for many to proceed on the basis that “it couldn’t happen” or, indeed even after
it began, “wasn’t happening”.
Long enough, crucially, for investors to get too used to elevated returns. Those returns came
largely from two sources. The fall in risk-free rates, brought about by an ex ante imbalance of
global savings and investment; and the fall in risk premia, which may in part have flowed
from improved monetary policy regimes around the world. The ensuing Search for Yield can
be thought of as asset managers and bankers wanting to sustain into the future the fabulous
ex post returns “achieved” as asset prices rose. Its main engines were leverage, and maturity
transformation. A cocktail that not only raised private risks for asset managers and lenders,
but also systemic risks.
The upshot has been a protracted, and not yet concluded, period of deleveraging. That, in
the great scheme of things, relatively small US subprime mortgage delinquencies could set
this off shows just how fragile the system had become.
Structural changes in the financial system really matter
As commentators struggle to make sense of this, a lot has been said about the “originate and
distribute” model of financial intermediation. Three comments on that.
First, not enough was done to reflect changes in business models in disclosure regimes and
practices. In some distant world, banks in, say, Germany were exposed largely to German
companies and households; and similarly Californian banks to Californian borrowers and
projects. So if conditions deteriorated in Germany, California or wherever, the markets would
be alert to the need to scrutinise the “home” banks operating in those regions or sectors. In
today’s world, the markets knew that risk really had been dispersed. But they did not know
where it might be concentrated; and, crucially, did not know how or how far it might flow back
to the banking sector and so towards the core of the payments system that supports our

BIS Review 77/2008

1

monetary economy. It is in the interests of banks themselves – and certainly in the interests
of their creditors and shareholders – to make those risks clearer in future; and if they do so,
they will face stronger incentives to avoid risk concentrations.
But my second point is that talk of the shift to “Originate & Distribute” can be overdone. Many
of the largest global banks seem to have occupied a half-way house. They retained large
positions on what amounted to a view that macroeconomic conditions could never get so bad
as to cause material impairment, but booked them to portfolios that were marked-to-market
(or to models). That left them exposed to a deterioration in financial conditions, particularly in
liquidity, and so to a fall in “market” prices way beyond anything they contemplated, or
perhaps still contemplate, for fundamental impairment. This is the mentality of traditional
“banking book” risk assessment grafted on to post-Glass Steagall “trading book” valuations
and financial accounting. As the regime currently works, mark-to-market is not – or, rather,
cannot be – just an accounting convention; it needs to be a culture, or way of life, for those
who adopt it. The dynamics of a financial system in which the vast majority employ MTM
accounting, irrespective of their declared holding periods, are fundamentally different from
one in which just a few “market-makers” do so.
Third, therefore, the rules and infrastructure supporting the financial system need to help it
withstand stress. Accounting and valuation policies is one such area, now being debated.
Another is the trading and clearing platforms themselves. The authorities must do what they
can to encourage the industry to focus on whether more wholesale market activity could and
should be conducted across central trading and clearing platforms rather than OTC. In the
past, intermediaries have tended to be doubtful about this. But it is plausible that the system
would have been somewhat more resilient if “vanilla” products had been subjected to the
minimum standards, greater pre and post-trade transparency, and centrally set margin
requirements that accompany transacting across central infrastructure. The underlying point
here is that the bodies providing such central infrastructure have a clear interest in effective
system-wide risk management and stability, and can be monitored by the authorities.
For the authorities internationally, the moral of the story is that they must take an interest,
from a systemic perspective, in the regimes which govern, and drive changes in, the
structure and behaviour of the financial system. That means maintaining that interest during
peacetime, not just a necessary rush of activity after crises occur.
In setting the rules of the game, the authorities need to strike a trade off between risk and
efficiency. We could reduce the risk in the system by stifling innovation. But in order to
choose to tilt the balance towards innovation and efficiency, the authorities need to be
confident that they have regimes that, amongst other things, (i) are effective in mopping up
the mess, and (ii) do not create bad long-term incentives.
Orthodoxy is to cut off incipient systemic stress at the pass: intervene early, and decisively,
but leaving losses with the private sector and afterwards rejigging the structure of the system
to contain the implications for future behaviour. For that, tools are needed. In very broad
terms, this is precisely what the Special Resolution Regime for banks and improved deposit
insurance proposed by the UK authorities are about. They are tools the authorities need to
contain the disruption caused when bank failures occur and so to make such individual firm
failures tolerable.
But we also need policies for containing systemic stress more generally; and, if possible, for
heading off the risk of systemic problems in the first place. Like others, in speeches I have
identified three elements in that armoury: monetary policy; central bank liquidity policy; and
policies towards bank capitalisation and liquidity.
Monetary policy
I have for some years openly queried the notion that it is enough to rely on monetary policy
“mopping up” after the event.

2

BIS Review 77/2008

The “mopping up” doctrine came out of a view that monetary authorities could not spot
bubbles but that policy could cushion the bursting of what turned out to be a bubble. The
doctrine effectively assumes that, faced with the possibility of systemic stress, the monetary
authority can always reduce its policy rate without taking risks with inflation. The current
conjuncture tests that assumption. There is a nasty shock to demand from tightening credit
conditions, here and abroad. And that may get worse rather than better in the coming
months. So far, the financial system has faced a “trading book” problem; but we cannot rule
out a “banking book” problem caused by rising defaults. We face a race involving whether
the deleveraging process can be sufficiently advanced for financial conditions to stabilise
before macroeconomic slowdown, here and abroad, raises loan defaults and so brings a new
dimension to the challenges in the banking sector and so to the supply of credit to the real
economy.
But, absolutely crucially, we also face a nasty shock to costs from rising commodity prices
and sterling’s depreciation. That is going to push up UK inflation over the next few months,
creating a risk of upward pressure on pay and higher inflation expectations.
The MPC’s strategy to date has been clear: to offset part but not all of the shock to demand,
consistent with an overriding determination to maintain medium-term inflation expectations
anchored to the 2% target. The path of rates will depend on judgments about the balance of
those risks to the inflation outlook. And, in the context of my remarks today, that is different
from a “mopping up” strategy involving simply reducing rates enough to offset estimates of
the effect of the demand shock plus some insurance on top of that.
Central bank liquidity policy: the Social Contract
If monetary policy has been constrained in alleviating the consequences of the financial
turmoil, so too, for different reasons, has central bank liquidity policy in many centres.
For over a century – coincident with the development of central banking – there has
effectively been a Social Contract between the banking system and the authorities. On one
side of the Contract, commercial banks have been permitted to profit from maturity
transformation, turning liquid savings into illiquid loans. Commercial banks’ ability to do this
relies on their deposit liabilities being a universally acceptable means of payment, money.
But maturity transformation – borrowing short to lend long – is risky; it relies on confidence.
And if that confidence cracks, the costs are felt not just by the customers and shareholders of
the banks concerned, but more widely in the economy given the potential disruption to the
payments system. Our monetary economy relies on stability in the banking system.
The other side of the Contract has, accordingly, had three elements designed to protect the
economy from those risks. First, prudential regulation of banks, to contain their risk taking
and so reduce the likelihood of confidence cracking. Second, deposit insurance, to make
retail depositors more or less whole in the event of failure notwithstanding that regulation.
And thirdly, central bank liquidity policy. Essentially, central banks have stood ready to
provide unlimited amounts of liquidity against good collateral at a rate above the market rate
prevailing during peacetime. 1 2
During the recent turmoil, that last part of the Contract broke down because borrowing from
the central bank via premium-rate facilities became stigmatised.

1

In Lombard Street (1873), Bagehot talks about high rates of interest rather than penalty rates as such. This is
in part because he was writing in the context of the gold standard regime, in which systemic stress was often
associated with an external flight of credit and so rising short-term interest rates (see pages 56 and 57); in part
because Bagehot thought about the premium in terms of comparisons with normal conditions (page 197).

2

This is to be distinguished from support operations for individual institutions.

BIS Review 77/2008

3

This could not have been more important. It has made innovation in central banks’ liquidity
provision imperative during the turmoil. And, when we regain peacetime, reforms will be
needed to avoid a recurrence of this problem. Open-market operations (or auctions) against
wider collateral, and the Bank’s Special Liquidity Scheme launched on 21 April, should both
be seen in that light. Such measures need to be constructed so that they do not interfere with
the implementation of monetary policy, which depends on the central bank’s net supply of
reserves matching demand in the economy so as to stabilise (risk free, or secured) overnight
money market interest rates broadly in line with the policy rate.
The monetary part of central banks’ market operations is simply the injection of reserves.
The other characteristics – counterparties, maturity, collateral etc – are essentially nonmonetary interventions. In most circumstances, central banks want to make them as neutral
as possible, so as not to interfere with relative asset prices in the economy. When markets
break down, however, central banks may need to calibrate their interventions to contain the
spillovers to the economy. Thus the SLS is designed to underpin the liquidity of the banking
system, and so confidence in the system as a whole.
Taming the credit cycle
But can we, the authorities, do more to avoid the system getting into such a fragile state in
the first place? We really must consider how to do that.
At the level of the system, the underlying issue is not that bankers are wicked or stupid.
There is, though, a nasty collective action problem. In the period leading up to the turmoil,
many market participants on both sides of the Atlantic thought financial risk was under
priced, especially in credit markets. But they did not know when the correction would come,
or indeed that it would definitely come abruptly. Each feared that by “stepping off the bus”
before their competitors, they would crystallise “business risk” as customers and activity
flowed away from them. This seems to point to the need for some kind of intervention by the
authorities. And, perhaps with hindsight, it is baffling that the authorities internationally
contented themselves with issuing warnings.
What instruments might the authorities have? There are already welcome exercises
underway to make the Basel Capital Accord less procyclical. The accountancy world is also
moving towards understanding that its policies affect behaviour and so system-wide
conditions. On both these fronts, the design of micro measures affects macro outcomes.
At a more macro level, we need to debate whether or not it would be feasible to design
discretionary levers that the authorities could employ as credit-cycle circuit breakers.
Candidates include the authorities adjusting industry-wide benchmark capital requirements or
margin requirements to slow commercial banks’ supply of leverage to the financial system
during the upswing. The debate needs to be international, as capital flows freely across
borders and so the capability of national authorities to act alone is constrained.
Conclusion
Interest in the issues I have touched on this morning must not ebb when peacetime is
eventually regained.
Parochially, there has been massively more public interest in the Bank of England’s financial
stability role during the period of turmoil than over the preceding years. But what we all do in
peacetime will affect how the next “war” plays out. We must not forget that. Central banks
can play a role because they can bring together and synthesise analytical and practical
expertise in macroeconomic conditions, financial markets and the financial infrastructure.
That synthesis is rather special, and should be at the service of the system as a whole.

4

BIS Review 77/2008

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet
for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House, London, 18 June
2008.
*

*

*

My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Ministers, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, Ladies
and Gentlemen:
Can it really be only a year since we last met in this magnificent room? With the financial
crisis continuing, I was tempted to deliver last year’s speech again. But that would not allow
me to welcome the Chancellor to his first Mansion House Dinner as Chancellor. After the
past – difficult – year, could I say, Chancellor, how much we at the Bank have appreciated
the patience and good humour with which you have handled the “slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune”.
Over that year, the west wind of a credit crunch emanating from the United States and the
east wind of higher energy and food prices resulting from the strength of Asian economies
have been stirring up the waters through which our economic ship must pass. These two
challenges of rising inflation and falling economic growth have led to a crop of doom-laden
predictions best captured by my less well-known addition to the well-known words of Robert
Frost:
Some say the world will end in fire,
Some say in ice.
But whichever it is
It won’t be NICE.
That “non-inflationary consistently expansionary” decade, as I described it in 2003, has
drawn to a close. Yesterday we learnt that inflation in May rose to 3.3%. In line with our
remit, I sent an open letter to the Chancellor. As I said in my letter, inflation is set to increase
further over the next few months. Oil prices have doubled since the beginning of last year,
and, in real terms, are now as high as they were in the 1970s. And further sharp increases in
domestic gas and electricity prices are probably on their way.
So what should the Monetary Policy Committee do in the face of this rise in inflation?
The immediate cause of the current pickup in inflation is increases in food and energy prices
relative to other prices. They are caused by the pressure of demand on the supply of food
and energy in the world as a whole. Part of that pressure may well reflect expansionary
monetary policy in the world as a whole. But the rise in commodity prices cannot, by itself,
generate sustained inflation in the United Kingdom unless we allow it to. We will not. So
although inflation in the UK will rise in the short term, inflation will then fall back.
That means that the rate of increase of other prices and domestic costs, notably pay, must
remain low. The MPC does not take that for granted. Surveys – including our own – indicate
that expectations of inflation have risen, meaning that inflation is likely to have some
tendency to persist. That is why, as I explained in my letter to the Chancellor, we believe that
a slowdown in the economy this year, creating a margin of spare capacity, will be necessary
to dampen price and wage pressures and ensure that we fulfil our remit by returning inflation
to the target. And growth is now slowing quite sharply – broad money growth is falling,
business surveys point to particularly weak output growth in the second quarter and growth is
likely to remain subdued for the rest of the year.
Where Bank rate will ultimately need to move to bring inflation back to target is impossible to
judge now. Decisions on Bank Rate will be made one month at a time in the careful way that
the MPC has developed over more than ten years. But there should be no doubt that the

BIS Review 79/2008

1

MPC is prepared to take whatever action is needed to return inflation to the 2% target and to
keep expectations of inflation in the medium term anchored to the target.
The fact that growth and inflation are heading in opposite directions has led some
commentators to question our monetary framework. Target growth not inflation is the cry. I
could not disagree more. This is precisely the situation in which the framework of inflation
targeting is so necessary. Without it, what should be a short-lived, albeit sharp, rise in
inflation, could become sustained. Without a clear guide to the objective of monetary policy,
and a credible commitment to meeting it, any rise in inflation might become a self-fulfilling
and generalised increase in prices and wages. And surely the lesson of the past fifty years is
that, when inflation becomes embedded, the cost of getting it back down again is a
prolonged period of sluggish output and high unemployment. Price stability – returning
inflation to the target – is a precondition for sustained growth, not an alternative.
We are in the most challenging period since the MPC was set up in 1997. But we have the
right framework in place to ensure that inflation returns to the target and growth recovers.
The stormy waters we are navigating now make for an uncomfortable passage compared
with the calm conditions of the nice decade. Our inflation performance then was surprising
not so much because inflation was low, but because it was so remarkably stable. Neither
inflation nor growth are likely to be as stable in the future. But even if inflation proves to be
more variable, it will not be systematically either higher or lower than the target.
The right framework is essential if we are to maintain low inflation and steady growth. But
there are two recent developments in our economy at present that no monetary policy,
whatever the framework, can prevent.
The first is the impact on living standards of rising food and energy prices. These prices have
risen relative to most other prices. Monetary policy should not, and in the end cannot,
prevent such changes in relative prices. They will show up either in higher consumer prices
or in a lower level of other prices and pay. Either way, the result is the same – a loss of real
purchasing power.
This year our real take-home pay will rise at a slower pace than national productivity. Rising
fuel, gas, electricity and food prices, mean that average real take-home pay will stagnate this
year. It will not be an easy time, and I know that some families will find it particularly difficult.
But it is only a temporary slowing in the growth of our real take-home pay and remember that
this is the opposite side of the coin to the falls in prices of manufactured goods from
countries such as China and India, which in the nice decade allowed our standard of living to
rise at a rate faster than productivity.
The squeeze on real take-home pay will arguably be an even more significant restraint on
consumer spending this year than the credit crunch. And it will affect the housing market too
– lower demand in the high street will go hand in hand with lower demand in the property
market. I have said in the past that there is no causal link between house prices and
consumer spending. That remains the case. How closely they move together depends on the
underlying forces that are driving them both. This year, the squeeze on real income growth is
likely to mean that both house prices and consumer spending weaken together.
The housing market leads me to the second recent development – the reassessment and repricing of risk in the financial sector. It is clear that the housing market is being severely
affected by the reluctance of the banking system to expand its balance sheet further. Banks
are adjusting to the fact that many asset markets are unlikely to re-open in their old form and,
as they do so, the supply of mortgage finance is being restricted. Once the adjustment in the
financial sector is complete, banks will be able to resume lending. But the era of cheap
mortgage finance that underpinned the housing market in 2006 and the first half of 2007 is
over and, as a result, it is reasonable to expect the ratio of house prices to incomes to fall
back, though with real interest rates still low by the standards of the past fifty years, not to
previous averages.

2

BIS Review 79/2008

These changes to our spending power and to the housing market are “real” shifts that,
although not easy to accept, we cannot side-step. Lord Mayor, we face the most difficult
economic challenge for two decades. But I am confident that we can meet it. Inflation will fall
back and growth will recover. But the cost of the necessary adjustment will depend on the
credibility of the framework for monetary stability. After all, the value of paper money rests on
only one thing – trust. Trust in the ability and determination of those setting interest rates to
maintain the value of money. Central to that is the independence of the Bank of England. An
independent central bank has, over time and around the world, proved to be a cornerstone of
the arrangements necessary to underpin trust in paper money.
So, Chancellor, I welcome your intention to introduce a proper process for making
appointments to positions on the Monetary Policy Committee.
I welcome too, Chancellor, the announcements you made tonight about the shape of a new
framework for financial stability to be embodied in a Banking Bill. I particularly welcome the
new responsibilities for the Bank of England and associated reforms to our governance. We
now have the chance to put in place a set of reforms that provide a coherent framework for
banking regulation. It is an opportunity we must not throw away. I can assure you all that the
Bank of England will devote time and resources to meeting the new responsibilities which the
Chancellor plans to give us.
Lord Mayor, shortly after assuming office, you were quoted as saying, “I think like a lawyer.
I’m very prudent, very risk-averse”. What a pity you weren’t running a bank a year or two
ago! But in a difficult year for the City you have provided leadership and thrown yourself into
the enormous workload of your office. Tonight all of us here would like to pay tribute to your
work since you became Lord Mayor, and to thank both the Lady Mayoress and yourself for
the splendid hospitality which you have extended to us all this evening.
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to
"The Lord Mayor and the Lady Mayoress, David and Theresa Lewis".

BIS Review 79/2008

3

John Gieve: A tale of two cycles
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the North East
Chamber of Commerce Durham Tees Valley Dinner, Durham, 19 June 2008.
*

*

*

Introduction
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to be here this evening in what has been a busy
week for the Bank, with the open letter to the Chancellor in response to the news on Tuesday
that CPI inflation rose to 3.3% in May, the latest MPC minutes, and the Chancellor’s
announcement last night of an enhanced role for the Bank on financial stability. Things have
certainly changed in the year since your chief executive, James Ramsbotham, asked me to
speak here this evening.
The Bank's links with this region go back to 1828 when, in response to a crisis of confidence
(this one over locally issued bank notes), we opened a branch in Newcastle. The move was
not well received. The Newcastle Chamber of Commerce, wrote to the Directors of the Bank
of England, saying "in the absence of any avowed motive for the establishment of a Branch
of the Bank of England, in Newcastle, [we] see no prospect of good from such an
establishment.......[We] most earnestly recommend to the Directors of the Bank of England to
re-consider the policy of the measure they are about to adopt and to abstain from trying such
an experiment on a system of banking, the advantages of which are so generally felt and
admitted."
I am pleased that our current Agents, David Buffham and Will Dowson receive a warmer
welcome from Chamber members and others as they travel around the region. Our agents
are the eyes and ears of the Bank. They make sure that we take account not just of the
economic statistics, which at best tell us what has just happened (and all too frequently fail to
do that), but also know what businessmen and women are saying about their own outlook
and plans. The Monetary Policy Committee receives a report from each region each month
and I can assure you it always receives a lot of attention. All the members of the Committee
also get out to meet businesses themselves and that is why I am here in the North East for
two days.
The main subject of my speech tonight is the wider economy, and in particular the tale of two
cycles – the downswing of the financial cycle and the upswing in the commodity price cycle.
The economic environment in context
But first, it is important to recognise that the last ten years have been a period of remarkable
stability for the UK’s economy. It has certainly been the most stable and successful period for
the economy in my lifetime. 1
When the MPC was set up, Charlie Bean – then a leading academic, soon to be my fellow
Deputy Governor – estimated that inflation would be away from the target by more than 1
percentage point in nearly 5 months of every year. Yet this week the Governor’s open letter
to the Chancellor to explain why inflation last month had deviated by more than a percentage
point from the target was only the second written in over 10 years.
And taking the past decade as a whole, this stability of inflation has not come at a cost to
growth – quite the opposite in fact. Output growth has been high both relative to the rates

1

Indeed work done at the Bank suggests that in terms of inflation, it has been the most stable decade in many
lifetimes – that is, since the Restoration at least (Benati (2006)).

BIS Review 80/2008

1

achieved on average over the preceding 30 years and in comparison with our European
neighbours. It also has been remarkably stable. 2
Of course that stability at the macro level disguises some big changes in the structure of the
economy. Indeed it has provided a platform for change. The North East for example is now
much more diverse than it was and less reliant on a few large industries. And, overall more
people are employed in the region: the number employed in the North East has risen by
more than 100,000 in the past ten years. And export growth remains relatively buoyant.
In contrast to this picture of stability, the preceding 3 decades were scarred by painful
recessions where unemployment rose sharply, and inflation fluctuated wildly. In particular,
there were three episodes between the mid-1970s and early 1990s, when inflation rose very
sharply, and at around the same time output contracted. While there are many in the room
that don’t need reminding, I thought I would just give the younger members of the audience a
reminder of just how desperate those times were (Chart 1).
In 1975, RPI inflation peaked just shy of a staggering 27% while at the same time output fell.
It was this era that entrenched the term “stagflation” in the minds of the public. Inflation fell
back sharply over the subsequent year or so, only to rear its head again in 1979-80 – this
time peaking at around 22%. Once again output contracted and unemployment rose sharply
(Chart 2).
A third and final bout of rising inflation and falling output occurred in the early 1990s, with the
unemployment rate once again rising above 10%. On average, inflation in the 1970s was
around 13% and 7.5% in the 1980s.
The UK macroeconomic framework
Why was it that output and inflation were so volatile then and why has economic
performance improved so much in the past 10 years? These questions are vital as we face
more uncertain times ahead and to ensure that we avoid repeating the mistakes of the past. I
would point to three main factors.
There have been changes to the structure of the UK economy that have made it more
flexible and adaptable. Labour market reforms enacted over the past twenty-five years have
led to a more flexible workforce. Unemployment has fallen without generating unsustainable
growth in wages, and hence inflation. And in recent years the role of migrant labour has been
important in easing the bottlenecks and skill shortages in what was otherwise an undoubtedly
tight labour market. Firms have been able to adjust and adapt to events more quickly and
that has produced less volatility in output, employment and inflation for the economy as a
whole. With economic growth expected to slow over the coming year pressures in the labour
market are likely to ease, reducing the demand for migrant labour, and possibly beginning to
reverse recent strong inflows.
A second fundamental change has been to the monetary policy framework. The experience
of those three recessions and bursts of inflation has led to a settled consensus that monetary
policy should be directed at controlling inflation and that there is no long-run trade off
between inflation and output growth. This consensus has been embedded by transferring
interest rate decisions to an independent Bank of England, with a clearly defined inflation
target of 2% measured by annual CPI inflation. That has helped build confidence that if
inflation does move away from target, we on the Monetary Policy Committee will act to
ensure that it returns to target in the medium term. That confidence should ensure that

2

2

It has only deviated by more than 1 percentage point from that average on 4 occasions. To put this in context,
in the preceding 3 decades stretching back to the 1960s, annual GDP growth deviated from its 10 year
average by more than 1 percentage point about half of the time (about 20 quarters in each 10 year period).

BIS Review 80/2008

employers and employees are less likely to adjust their prices and wages to a surprise
movement in inflation. In other words, their expectation of inflation in the medium-term
remains low, stable and anchored at the target. And that has helped to contribute not only to
the stability of inflation, but output as well.
Reforms to both the labour market and monetary policy have undoubtedly played an
important role in the reduction in output volatility and emergence of a stable, low inflation
environment. But there was a third factor at play that was probably also quite fundamental.
Over the first decade of the MPC the economic cycles in the rest of the world were generally
moderate, although not without excitement. And there is good evidence to suggest that the
integration of emerging economies, such as China, into the global economy was beneficial to
countries like the UK. The share of Chinese goods in total UK goods imports has almost
tripled in money terms over the past fifteen years to around 8 per cent, and it’s likely that
much of the content of imports from elsewhere originated in China. This rising share of
Chinese imports has reduced manufactured imported goods prices relative to other prices
and wages.
Consumer goods price inflation hovered around zero for most of the last ten years, until the
recent rise in oil prices. As a result, the purchasing power of UK consumers has risen with
higher real wages achieved without any cost to employers. In other words, for a period the
beneficial tailwind allowed the economy to run at a higher level of activity than would
otherwise have been the case, without generating additional inflationary pressures.
But the economic environment overseas has taken a turn for the worse. In many ways it is a
tale of two cycles.
The financial cycle
The first cycle has been in the financial sector in the West. A banking cycle is not a new
phenomenon but the scale of the expansion of cheap credit for some years and speed of the
downswing in the last year has been exceptional.
It started in the US with a real downturn in the housing market and rising default rates on
sub-prime mortgages in particular. That led to a freeze in the structured credit markets built
on those loans as investors lost confidence in the credit ratings they depend on.
In finance at least, it is still true that when America sneezes the rest of the world catches a
cold and the sub-prime crisis swiftly spread to financial institutions across the world. They
became uncertain about the value of the financial positions they held, let alone what their
counterparties held. This led to a wider loss of confidence in banks, the hoarding of cash and
illiquidity in many financial markets which is still not over.
As financial institutions all around the world have struggled to shrink their balance sheets in
the face of this storm, there has been a pronounced tightening in the supply of credit. The
number of loan approvals for house purchases fell to a new low in April to – on some
indicators – its lowest level in over thirty years (Chart 3).
In the past, the swings in the UK economy have been home grown. Credit squeezes have
typically resulted from rising domestic arrears and defaults, driven by economic downturns at
home. This time the sequence has been reversed. The broadest measures of economic
activity have continued to grow: quarterly GDP growth in the latest data for 2008Q1 was
0.4% and employment has continued to rise. The level of defaults on corporate and personal
loans has been low. So the squeeze on new lending has preceded rather than followed the
slowdown in the UK. The judgement we have to make is how far that tightening will restrain
the domestic economy in future.
There is no doubt it is having a material effect already (Chart 4). This is most obvious in the
housing market, where prices have fallen by around 7% since their peak, and have further to
fall. The drop in transactions and turnover is rippling through the housebuilding industry,

BIS Review 80/2008

3

estate agencies and mortgage brokers. Of course a fall in house prices benefits buyers just
as it hurts sellers so there is no necessary link to wider consumption. But the belief that in
housing you could have your cake and eat it – that is your house would not just provide a
place to live but would also provide an assured capital gain – has become widespread and
the shock to expectations appears to be having a wider impact on confidence. There are also
signs in some of the more timely survey indicators of consumer spending that weakness is
spreading there too.
If nothing else were going on, the MPC would expect this prospective weakness in overall
demand to put downward pressure on inflation in the medium term and that would be
pointing to further rate cuts.
The commodity price cycle
However, there is something else going on! Because if the US still drives the financial cycle,
it has become less dominant in the world economy. According to the IMF, emerging and
developing countries together generated around 70% of world growth in 2007, with China
alone generating around 25%. And the world economy has been and still is growing strongly.
That is what has been driving the rise in oil and commodity prices. For example, since the
start of 2005, China has accounted for almost all of the increase in world demand for key
metals such as aluminium, copper and zinc. And since 2000, around one-third of the
increase in world demand for oil has emanated from China.
Between 1997 and 2004 commodity prices were largely stable. However, since the end of
2004, sterling non-oil commodity prices have doubled, while sterling oil prices have more
than trebled. And half of that rise has occurred in the last 9 months.
The strength of demand for commodities in emerging markets has not been matched by
supply. In both the oil and metals sector, new capacity can take many years to come on
stream. And in the agricultural sector, output has been affected by adverse weather
conditions in North America, Europe and Australia.
As of yesterday, oil was trading at around $130 per barrel. Relative to the rise in the prices of
consumer goods and services, oil prices (in US dollars) are now higher than they were in the
1970s. The rise in oil prices has pushed up on fuel, retail gas and electricity prices. Similarly,
the rising cost of agricultural commodities has driven up food prices (Chart 5). Taken
together energy and food components can account for 1.1 percentage points of the 1.2
percentage points increase in CPI inflation from 2.1% in December last year to 3.3% in May.
There is no doubt that the emergence of China, India and other Asian economies in recent
years is a permanent change in the structure and balance of the world economy. But there
are signs too that an element of their recent growth may be cyclical. The growing inflationary
pressures and the scale of the booms in investment are typical of economies reaching the
top of the cycle. The huge increase in oil and food prices will itself have a dampening effect
on consumers in those countries – as it will in the West. So we may well see the balance of
supply and demand shift at some point.
UK inflation outlook
But the immediate prospect is for rising inflation. As the Governor explained in his open letter
to the Chancellor, when the rise in energy prices passes through to consumers, CPI inflation
is likely to rise sharply in the second half of the year, to above 4%. There is of course
considerable uncertainty around this, and if energy and other import prices rise further, CPI
inflation could well go even higher in the short term. That is bound to lead to a downward
adjustment to real take-home pay. That cannot be avoided. Indeed, such an adjustment was
seen in response to the rise in energy prices in 2004-06. Over that period, nominal wage

4

BIS Review 80/2008

growth was broadly stable, and there was a relatively smooth adjustment to real wages in
response to the rise in energy prices.
A key risk to the outlook is whether a similar, benign adjustment will occur in response to the
latest price rises. With inflation having been above target for much of the past three years,
and set to rise further in the near term, there is a risk that households and businesses may
start to expect CPI inflation to be persistently above 2%. If that happened, and those
expectations were built into higher wages and prices, the benign adjustment would not be
repeated. So we are closely monitoring developments in inflation expectations. Unfortunately
inflation expectations can’t be observed directly. But a number of measures, including
household surveys and financial market instruments, can act as a guide (Chart 6).
While all these measures have their drawbacks, most have risen – in some cases markedly –
over the past year. It is unclear to what extent these measures contain information about the
medium-term – the horizon over which the MPC aim to bring inflation back to target. And it is
comforting that other measures – such as money spending remain stable and in line with the
average rate of increase since 1997. And the Committee’s commitment to ensuring inflation
returns to the 2% target should give those setting prices and wages some confidence that
inflation will be close to target in the future.
Conclusion
There is no doubt that the current climate is the most challenging the MPC has ever had to
face. Balancing the downside risk to demand associated with tighter credit conditions against
the inflationary pressures emanating from the rest of the world is an enormous challenge.
And the immediate prospect is for a deterioration in both output growth and inflation.
Monetary policy cannot prevent the economy being buffeted by developments in the wider
world economy but the experience of the past 10 years has shown that the economy is now
more flexible in responding to events. Crucially we now have a credible framework for setting
monetary policy to meet the inflation target in the medium term.
Monetary policy cannot prevent the short-run ups and downs of economic cycles. In the
current climate, the Committee believes that, if Bank Rate were set to bring inflation back to
target too quickly, the result would be unnecessary volatility in output and employment.
Instead we are focused on returning CPI inflation to the 2% target in around two years, when
the present sharp rises in energy and food prices will have dropped out of the CPI inflation
rate. We judge that in order for inflation to return to target it will be necessary for economic
growth to slow this year, reducing the pressure on supply capacity of the economy and
dampening increases in prices and wages. But the risks to both the upside and downside
remain large and the MPC will continue to make its judgement about the appropriate level of
Bank Rate month by month.
The next year is not going to be comfortable for anyone and we already hear calls to change
the system, the target, and our focus on inflation. But the new framework and the
independence of the Bank was designed for difficult times as well as for plain sailing. I hope
we can look to you and other businesses for support in doing what is needed to bring
inflation back to target.

BIS Review 80/2008

5

6

BIS Review 80/2008

BIS Review 80/2008

7

Nigel Jenkinson: Financial innovation – what have we learnt?
Speech by Mr Nigel Jenkinson, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, to
the Reserve Bank of Australia Conference on “Lessons from the Financial Turmoil of 2007
and 2008”, Sydney, 14-15 July 2008.
This speech is co-authored with Adrian Penalver and Nicholas Vause.

*

*

*

Section 1: Introduction
1. At last year’s conference, we presented a paper highlighting the profound impact of rapid
financial innovation, deregulation and capital market integration on the performance, risk and
management of the global financial system. We particularly noted the benefits of financial
innovation. 1 We argued that the development of new financial instruments has created
opportunities for households and corporates to improve their management of financial risks
and has facilitated the smoothing of consumption and investment over time and across
different states of the world. But we also emphasised that the breakdown of barriers to the
supply of financial products and the large volume of risk pooling and shifting within and
across borders has increased the network interconnections within the global financial
system. That has added to the system’s complexity. And we underlined that understanding
and addressing the corresponding evolution of financial system risks poses major challenges
for financial institutions and for financial stability authorities.
2. The past year has seen these potential major challenges turn into real practical problems.
We are now almost a year into a credit crisis centred around a sudden evaporation of market
liquidity for many structured credit products that rapidly spilled over into wholesale bank
funding markets and beyond, given a complex web of interconnections. 2 So it is an
opportune moment to review whether the financial innovation of recent years that created
such structured products has indeed been a positive force, as argued by Alan Greenspan 3 ,
for example, or whether financial innovation has been a malign development, producing
“financial weapons of mass destruction” in the words of Warren Buffett 4 ?
3 There is clearly some force in both arguments. On balance, we continue to see
considerable benefits to households and corporates from the broadening of choice in
financial products and from improvements in the completeness of financial markets. But
equally, the severe pressures and strains of the past year have highlighted the
pervasiveness of some market frictions that have a major bearing on system-wide behaviour
and dynamics, amplifying and transmitting shocks. Action to lower these frictions is
consequently important to capture the full benefits of innovation and to ensure that these are
durable.
4 This paper explores these issues further. Section 2 provides a short reminder of the
staggering extent of financial innovation in recent decades. Section 3 sets out the theoretical
vision of how financial innovation offers the potential for substantial improvements in the
capability of corporates and households to manage financial risks. Section 4 highlights the

1

“Innovation and Integration in Financial Markets and the Implications for Financial Stability”, Rob Hamilton,
Nigel Jenkinson and Adrian Penalver, pp. 226-250, The Structure and Resilience of the Financial System, eds
Christopher Kent and Jeremy Lawson, Reserve Bank of Australia, November 2007.

2

See for example, the Bank of England Financial Stability Report, October 2007 and the Bank of England
Financial Stability Report, April 2008.

3

See for example World Finance and Risk Management, delivered at Lancaster House 25 September 2002.

4

Referring to derivatives in the Berkshire Hathaway Inc. 2002 Annual Report.

BIS Review 93/2008

1

obstacles to fulfilment of that vision given the imperfections in financial markets. Lessons for
the future and possible policy responses are discussed in Section 5, while Section 6
concludes.
Section 2: Trends in financial innovation
5 The pace of change in financial markets in recent years is truly remarkable. A few statistics
help to illustrate this point and set the scene:
•

The outstanding value of interest rate swaps and other derivatives reached almost
$600 trillion or some 11 times annual global GDP by the end of 2007, according to
the BIS. Ten years ago the value was around $75 trillion (2 ½ times GDP) (Chart 1).
The global derivatives market expanded almost 50% during 2007.

Chart 1 Outstanding Notional Amounts of
Derivatives
US$trillions
700

Interest rate contracts
Foreign exchange contracts
Credit default swaps

600

Equity-linked contracts

500

Commodity contracts
Unallocated

400
300
200
100
0

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Source: BIS.

•

The credit default swap (CDS) component has experienced explosive growth. The
outstanding value of CDS contracts has surged to more than five times the
outstanding principal of global corporate bonds by the end of 2007. Yet only three
years’ ago, at end-2004, the CDS market was only some 85% of the size of the
corporate bond market. The CDS market is now by far the more liquid market for
trading credit risk.

•

The outstanding value of commodity derivatives outstanding has risen from around
$400 billion in 1998 to $9 trillion at the end of 2007.

•

Options markets have also grown very strongly. For example, the outstanding
principal of interest rate options has increased from $8 trillion to $57 trillion in the
past decade.

•

Innovation and the removal of barriers to cross-border activity has spurred global
capital market integration. For example, turnover in foreign exchange markets has
tripled since the BIS survey in 2001. And cross-border asset holdings have
outpaced the strong growth in the global stock of financial assets.

•

Markets offering investors ready-made portfolios rose very rapidly in advance of
the credit crisis. Issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS) globally was
$1460 billion in the first half of 2007, up from $425 billion 9 years previously. There

2

BIS Review 93/2008

was rapid expansion in the market for collateralised debt obligations (CDO) from
$75 billion in the first half of 2005 to $200 billion in the first half of 2007. And
innovation spawned greater complexity. Investment banks launched a series of
highly complex products such as constant proportion debt obligations (CPDO) and
re-securitisations of CDOs and ABSs (so called CDO-squared and CDOs of ABS).
•

Demand for such tailor-made products has plummeted over the past year, while
other markets such as the corporate CDS market have continued to expand
rapidly. A possible explanation and assessment of the implications is set out in the
remainder of the paper.

Section 3: Financial innovation: a broadening of choice
6 A crucial function of the financial system is to help companies and households to manage
risks. The discharge of this function depends on the type of financial products or contracts
made available to companies and households to hedge and take on risk exposures in close
alignment with their individual risk preference and tolerance, as well as the capability of the
institutions that make up the financial system to manage the risk inherent in these products.
The focus of this section is on how innovation in financial instruments extends the choice of
risk management products available to companies and households, moving us closer
towards a vision of liquid markets in state contingent securities. But it must also be borne in
mind that imperfections within financial markets will affect the performance of these
innovative financial products, that may in turn limit their availability. Such frictions may thus
impact on the ability of the financial system to support corporate and household risk
management. That is covered in section 4.
7 As an illustration of the potential benefits of innovation in contract design and broadening
choice, consider the market for corporate credit risk. In previous decades, the only securities
available to investors wishing to invest in corporate debt were corporate bonds. One might
call such assets “natural assets” as the same instrument that is issued by the borrower is
also that held by the investor. In this example, the role of the financial system is simply to
facilitate the intermediation between end borrowers and end investors, and, in some cases,
to provide a secondary market in the asset, intermediating between alternate end investors.
There is no transformation of the asset.
8 Financial engineering can, however, decompose the returns on a corporate bond into
different fundamental components or “atoms” of risk:
•

For example, credit default swaps can be used to separate the return on a corporate
bond into the compensation for default risk and the compensation earned on a riskfree security. An investor wanting to make an inter-temporal transfer without taking
on any credit risk, for example, could then buy a bond and purchase credit default
swap protection, thus retaining exposure to the cash flows on the risk free
component of the underlying instrument. Synthetically, this expands the volume of
low risk investment portfolios. On the other side, a market is created for those who
specifically want to trade default risk which allows cleaner pricing of this dimension
of risk. Efficient markets for each element should raise the efficiency of the
corporate bond market as a whole, with attendant benefits for both borrowers and
investors.

•

Furthermore, because credit default swaps have different maturities, investors
could, for example, buy the corporate bond and retain the resulting exposure to
default risk in the near term. But they could also buy protection against default at
longer horizons, about which they may be more uncertain.

•

Moreover, nominal corporate bonds can also be separated into a nominal and
inflation-linked risk component if the corporate also issues inflation-indexed bonds.

BIS Review 93/2008

3

Investors can utilise these instruments to buy or sell protection against exposure to
inflation risk.
As noted above, the markets for single-name corporate credit default swaps have become
more liquid than the underlying bonds given the flexibility and specificity they provide to endinvestors.
9 The underlying components of risk can, of course, also be recombined by financial
engineering to create new financial products with different risk characteristics. Extending the
above example, single-name credit default swaps have been pooled together into
standardised indices. That creates a synthetic market in generalised corporate credit risk,
enabling investors wishing to hedge or establish a new position linked to macro-economic
risk to do so. And there are many parallels such as products tracking equity indices or
commodity prices or emerging market debt to name but a few.
10 The value of standardised indices to financial intermediaries can be illustrated by
considering a credit default swap dealer, who may find at the end of a day’s trading that they
have been a net seller of default protection on several dozen corporates. The dealer could
hedge such a position by buying protection on the standardised indices. The hedge would of
course not be perfect as in all likelihood the firms in the standardised indices would not be an
exact match to those whom the dealer had sold protection. But because indices are relatively
liquid and thus cheaper to trade, the dealer may decide that the resulting saving in
transaction costs may outweigh the residual “basis” risk that results from the hedge being
imperfect. And through competition, the benefit would tend to be shared by corporate
borrowers and investors in corporate credit risk.
11 Taking the example further, investors who wish to take exposure to generalised corporate
credit risk but who wish to limit their potential losses can do so through trading options
contracts on the standardised indices. The array of options with different “strike prices”,
which represent the thresholds beyond which the options do or do not pay out, allows market
participants to express opinions about the distribution of possible future aggregate corporate
conditions.
12 Credit default swaps are not the only way an investor can engineer a targeted exposure to
credit risk. Alternatively, an investor can take a position on corporate credit risk by
purchasing a securitised product such as a collateralised debt obligation (CDO). In this case,
a pool of assets such as corporate bonds is created and the payment streams produced by
these are allocated to different classes or tranches depending on the default experience.
This allows investors to take positions on the scale of default losses in the underlying asset
pool.
13 Stepping back, the extended example above highlights how financial engineering has
facilitated the decomposition of corporate credit risk into different subcomponents and the
recombination of these subcomponents into new financial products with different risk
characteristics. There are many other examples across the financial system. The consequent
broadening of the range of financial products has improved choice and the matching and
tailoring of products to customer needs. For instance, the ability of non-financial corporates
to manage their risks has been transformed by their increasing use of derivatives to hedge
interest rates and currency risk as well as their exposures to commodity prices. And
notwithstanding the current squeeze on the availability of credit (and withdrawal of many
products), households have also benefited from a significant expansion in the range of
saving and borrowing products compared to the position 20 years ago.
14 The practical examples described above clearly demonstrate the benefits of financial
innovation. Enhancing the capability to transform and transfer risk, and thus improving the
matching of the supply of risk products to the demands of end investors offers the prospect
of lower risk premia and greater financial efficiency. And that in turn should lower the cost of
capital for firms and improve the ability of households to smooth their lifetime consumption
and to insure against unexpected outcomes.

4

BIS Review 93/2008

15 Taking an even further step back, there is a beguiling vision of financial innovation taking
us closer towards a world of more complete and efficient markets for state-contingent
contracts. The ability to decompose and trade the distribution of many dimensions of
fundamental risks creates a potential lattice of efficient risk prices which can then, by
arbitrage, be used to price efficiently the combinations of these risks embedded in “natural
assets” and in “synthetic assets” structured to meet investor demand.
Section 4: Frictions and Market Imperfections
16 The previous section described how financial innovation has widened the range and
choice of financial products available to corporates and households to facilitate improved risk
management. But it also noted the potential importance of market imperfections and frictions
in the provision of such contracts. One year on from the onset of the current credit crisis,
what have we learned about the performance of the financial system and such market
imperfections?
17 Looking broadly, an important lesson from the past year, is that these frictions appear
more powerful than market participants and financial authorities previously judged. They
pose substantial barriers and practical limitations to the achievement of a stylised vision of
full, complete, and efficient markets in fundamental components of risk. Five areas of
potential weakness are highlighted in turn: incomplete information; alignment of incentives;
liquidity in financial markets; robustness of market infrastructure; and system dynamics.
Incomplete information
18 The vision of a world of complete and efficient markets for risk depends on full
information. This full information requirement sounds deceptively simple but is actually
extremely onerous. An investor needs to know the mapping between states of the world and
the pay-offs they would receive in each state as well as the likelihood of these states of the
world materialising. This means not only understanding the details of highly complex
contracts but also the effects of the interplay between exposures and contracts of all the
other agents in the economy. So not surprisingly, many of the problems that have occurred
over the past 10 months have arisen out of incomplete and asymmetric information. There
are a number of dimensions.
19 First, it is very difficult to ascertain the pay-off distribution for many instruments. For
example, a mezzanine CDO tranche might have attachment and detachment points of say
7% and 10%, meaning that for losses on the underlying collateral of less than 7% they
continue to pay out at par, but become worthless when losses reach 10%. The pay-offs to
such instruments are therefore highly sensitive to quite minor changes in expected credit
conditions. In a full-information world with known probability distributions, instruments with
such highly sensitive pay-offs are no more difficult to price than any others. But when lack of
complete information makes the future uncertain, in a Knightian sense, contracts with highly
sensitive pay-offs to slight changes in credit conditions become increasingly risky. Moreover,
innovative instruments inherently will not have a long run of performance data. Those
seeking to summarise their likely performance using statistical metrics based on limited data
and drawn from very benign circumstances have a very difficult task. Many investors in
RMBS and ABS CDOs linked to US sub prime mortgages have been surprised by the extent
to which the performance of these instruments has fallen short of even their worst
expectations. Securities with complex pay-offs, therefore, are highly vulnerable to increased
macroeconomic uncertainty.
20 Second, information loss is built into the securitisation process because of the separation
between the originator of the loan and the end investor. Chart 2 illustrates how information is
lost at every step in the chain of risk transfer. To some extent, holding a diversified pool of
underlying loans acts as protection against a lack of information about idiosyncratic risk. But

BIS Review 93/2008

5

the experience of the past year has shown that diversified pools and seniority in the tranche
structure may not provide adequate protection against highly co-ordinated or “systemic” risk.
Chart 2 – Information Loss

Source: BIS Committee on the Global Financial System

21 Many investors had, of course, also delegated their monitoring responsibility to credit
rating agencies. This offered, potentially, a very significant efficiency gain. Rather than many
investors paying privately to be moderately informed – with corresponding substantial
replication of investment analysis – credit rating agencies were paid to be well informed and
to make this information public. But we now know that rating agencies were also unable to
overcome these same underlying information problems and have been forced to make
multiple down-grades to many of their ratings of structured credit products and to modify the
models they use for ratings. A major problem for the market as a whole has been that once
investors collectively lost trust in rating agencies, the next most informed participants in the
market were a long way behind. As a result, there was a step-change down in the level of
confidence in the likely performance of these assets and a consequent system-wide increase
in the risk premia required to hold such assets. With hindsight, information generation and
processing was too reliant on a limited number of rating agencies, and there was too much
confidence in the ability of individual rating agencies to solve the highly complex information
problems underlying some securities.
22 Third, it is very hard to determine counterparty credit risk for state-contingent securities. In
a world of full information, the state-contingent survival of counterparties would be known
and nobody would accept contracts from those who could not honour them – at least not
without a substantial price discount by way of compensation. But when investors cannot
know the full network of exposures in the financial system, it is extremely hard to estimate

6

BIS Review 93/2008

where the ultimate incidence of losses from an extreme shock will occur. The failure of your
counterparties’ counterparty can shift you up the queue of potential losers quite quickly.
Moreover, the fear of potential counterparty risk itself quickly affects the behaviour of
individual firms and thus leads to a collective lowering of risk appetite.
23 These problems are potentially the most acute for what might be called tail-risk products.
During the boom, tail-risk products, like deeply out of the money options, seemed an easy
way to make money. The protection seller could collect a steady stream of premia with the
extremely unlikely prospect of having to make a very large payment. Since these sorts of
contracts offer “deep” insurance, it is important to the system as a whole that they are held
by the most robust institutions. Here, the theory of risk transfer was that risk would be reallocated to those most able to bear it. In practice, though, those most willing to take these
risks have in some cases turned out to be those who understood the risks the least and thus
were prepared to take it on at too low a price. This problem is extremely hard to guard
against because of the difficulty in determining whether a counterparty who is insuring you
against risk (or a chain of counterparties) fully understands what they have taken on and
have the capacity to make good on their commitment in adverse states of the world. In recent
months, banks have been forced to write down the value of contracts that they had bought
from monoline insurers to guarantee the payments promised by their holdings of highly-rated
CDOs linked to US sub prime mortgages. With the likelihood of such guarantees being called
upon appearing very small, the monolines wrote a large volume of such guarantees. But
more recently, this prospect has become a distinct possibility, and one that threatens the
viability of some of the monoline insurers, and thus their perceived ability to pay.
Incentives
24 These information problems are difficult enough when risk is treated as exogenous. And
in a world of full information, “nature” can be the only source of uncertainty. But in practice
when there is a lack of information and uncertainty about actions, the incentives facing
individual actors become very important and can lead to endogenous risk creation within the
financial system.
25 These incentive problems have been clearly apparent in risk transfer markets. As has
been widely described elsewhere, if loan originators do not have sufficient capital at stake,
they will not screen potential borrowers adequately. 5 In the US sub-prime mortgage market,
rewarding loan originators by volume of issuance was a recipe for lax credit assessment
standards. But even when originators seem to have an economic stake in performance, for
example by holding some of the “first loss” or equity tranche of a securitisation, this is not
sufficient to guarantee incentive compatibility, as it is possible to hedge the exposure to the
equity tranche through a separate market transaction.
26 There is, though, also a more subtle problem. As mentioned above, holding a diversified
pool provides protection against idiosyncratic risk. But the absence of a concentrated
exposure can also limit the incentive to monitor individual loans, and thus the pooling of risk
may lead to a reduction in the overall level of risk screening ex ante and monitoring ex post.
It was the combination of these misaligned incentives that proved such a problem in the US
sub-prime mortgage market. Individual end-investors had little incentive to monitor the
performance of loan originators, perhaps presuming that originators had sufficient stake in
the securitisation to provide market discipline. Issuers, though, transferred much of the risk
and did so comprehensively, as they needed to demonstrate that they had transferred risk
irrevocably before they could get capital relief. But in the absence of adequate monitoring,
originators could chase volume at the expense of lending standards.

5

See for example, the Bank of England Financial Stability Report, October 2007.

BIS Review 93/2008

7

27 Therefore, two elements at the heart of the benefits of financial innovation – the ability to
pool and transfer risk – contributed to an endogenous increase in the level of underlying
credit risk.
28 There is also a potential incentive problem arising from the separation of legal ownership
from economic exposure – although this is at the moment a possible difficulty for the future.
Credit default swaps transfer the risk of economic loss to the seller of protection but the right
to trigger covenants or put a firm into administration remains with the underlying asset
holder. A protected asset holder, therefore, has little incentive to monitor a company closely
and trigger covenants or force it into administration at the first signs that its business may
have become unsustainable. And the seller of protection lacks an alternative legal remedy.
Companies may therefore continue to operate for longer than they did in the past once they
get into trouble. So, the use of credit default swaps may reduce the probability of default but
increase loss given eventual default.
Liquidity
29 These problems of incomplete information, and misaligned incentives have had a major
impact on the market liquidity of innovative financial instruments.
30 As described above, misaligned incentives in origination and distribution allowed the
provision of sub-prime mortgages to households with very little prospect of repayment and
significant vulnerability to modest changes in economic circumstances. So any investor trying
to estimate the distribution of likely future delinquency rates amongst sub-prime borrowers
would not only have to consider the range of macroeconomic outcomes but also how much
this effect would be amplified by poor credit risk screening. This would be an extremely
difficult variable to quantify. But because of the sensitivity of complex securities to small
changes in loss rates, differing judgements about the quality of risk screening could make a
material difference to the value of the instrument. The recognition that risk screening and the
availability and quality of information on the performance of complex products was
significantly weaker than previously anticipated, as for example investors lost confidence in
the quality of credit ratings, led to a substantial increase in the risk premium required to hold
such assets. These effects made the valuation of assets extremely uncertain and contributed
to the rapid evaporation of secondary market liquidity.
31 There is also an important and fundamental tension between the capability of financial
engineering to tailor financial products to meet individual investor demand more effectively
and secondary market liquidity. The more closely a specific financial instrument is matched
to the risk preferences of an individual investor, the harder it is to find another investor willing
to trade that exact instrument in the event of a shock to those risk preferences.
32 In other words, the improved matching of risk to an individual’s risk profile has given rise
to an increase in basis risk within the system. As one illustrative example, any investor
wishing to hedge any exposure to the US sub-prime mortgage market over the past year or
so would have little alternative but to trade in the standardised ABX indices (which
themselves have often been relatively illiquid) rather than in the specific instrument they held.
The developments over the past year have illustrated that hedges have often provided less
effective than envisaged, and that there was a significant under-pricing of the inherent basis
risk of many innovative structured instruments at the point of origination, given the lack of
secondary market liquidity for such specific risk. Looking forward, it is quite likely that there
will be greater unbundling of complex instruments into standardised components that are
likely to be liquid and readily traded with low transactions costs, and bespoke elements that
will command a higher risk premium given their inherent illiquidity.

8

BIS Review 93/2008

Strengthening financial infrastructure
33 Because of the specificity of the risk, innovative financial products are rarely exchange
traded. Non-standardised products require the services of a broker-dealer to trade. But over
the counter (OTC) trading is vulnerable to many operational risks. In particular, investors are
exposed to the default of the major broker-dealer counterparties. This was a significant
concern to counterparties of Bear Stearns when it was in distress before being taken over by
JP Morgan. To moderate such concerns in the future, private sector initiatives are being
developed to introduce a central clearer to the CDS market. Such initiatives are very
welcome. Although the net positions of CDS dealers generally represent only a very small
fraction of their gross positions, because these gross positions have grown so rapidly in
recent years, inter-dealer positions can sometimes be very significant – even after netting. A
central clearer that would offset any long bilateral positions that one bank had with another
with any short positions that the same bank had with a third bank, could significantly reduce
the counterparty risk in the CDS market. A leading proposal at present is centred on the
Clearing Corporation, which is jointly owned by eleven major banks and other trading
platforms.
34 Counterparty risk, as described above, is particularly corrosive for liquidity in financial
markets. Investors become concerned not only with the soundness of their immediate
counterparties but their counterparties’ counterparties, and so on. When risk crystallises it
can be unclear which financial institutions have been adversely affected. As a result of
limited disclosure and transparency, investors may limit the supply of funds to a much
broader array of counterparties than necessary. This helps to explain why all banks found it
more difficult to raise funding when the deterioration in the performance of sub prime assets
became apparent, even though it would later be revealed that some banks were more
exposed than others.
35 A further challenge is that the markets for innovative financial instruments can grow very
rapidly, outstripping the capacity of back offices to keep up with trading. Towards the end of
2005, CDS trading had run ahead of the processing of trades to the extent that the major
CDS dealers on average had unconfirmed trades outstanding that were equivalent to a
couple of weeks of trading volume. If the reference entities underlying these CDS trades had
defaulted, it would not have been clear – at least for some time – who was owed money by
whom. The international authorities then set the major CDS dealers targets to reduce
volumes of unconfirmed trades, which subsequently fell significantly. But a backlog of
unconfirmed trades did start to cumulate again during the early months of the recent financial
turmoil, although this has also diminished over the past six months. Furthermore, the
proportion of new CDS trades that are confirmed electronically and hence immediately has
increased sharply from around 50% when concerns were raised in 2005 to over 90% at
present.
36 It is also important that innovative financial products are documented sufficiently carefully
and that their risks are accurately communicated to potential investors. The more complex
the instrument, the greater the scope for misunderstanding. Investors have recently incurred
significant losses on complex securities like CDOs and a number are expected to sue for
mis-selling. HSH Nordbank is already suing UBS for the mis-selling of CDOs, for example,
and Banca Popolare di Intra has a lawsuit against Bank of America for the same reason.
Wingecarribee Shire Council is also suing Lehman Brothers for the mis-selling of CDOs.
System dynamics and the amplification of shocks
37 The frictions of incomplete information, imperfect incentives and inherent illiquidity of
bespoke financial instruments may also be amplified by adverse dynamics within the
financial system itself. For example, poorly-designed remuneration structures and short-term
performance targets may encourage “herding” behaviour within the financial system that

BIS Review 93/2008

9

raises the costs of taking a contrarian view. And there are also well-documented concerns
that regulatory design pays insufficient attention to the risk of procyclicality 6 .
38 It also appears to be the case that many firms failed to take sufficient account of the likely
behaviour of other firms, and thus of system properties, when designing stress tests and
contingency plans. They were far too confident in their ability to exit or hedge positions in
high risk instruments, where trades were highly crowded, and were consequently underprepared for the evaporation of market liquidity.
39 Moreover, there are some financial instruments (such as mortgage-backed securities
where the mortgages have prepayment options), where the dynamic hedging behaviour of
holders can amplify the price movement, as dynamic hedging can lead to additional short
hedging positions being required after a price fall. With individual institutions being small
relative to the market, each individual institution may think that their new short position will
have little or no impact on market prices. But collectively, the aggregate demand for new
short positions is likely to drag prices further down and amplify the original shock, generating
additional losses for those who were slower to update their dynamic hedging 7 .
Section 5: Some lessons and policy responses
40 We are now around a year into a severe credit crisis centred on many of the complex
structured instruments described earlier. An immediate behavioural response of risk
managers in major financial institutions has been to pull out of these markets entirely. This
has dramatically reduced primary and secondary market liquidity and increased price
volatility, further reducing incentives to invest in these instruments. The short term outlook for
many of these innovative instruments is poor. And as described in section 4, the past year
has revealed that market imperfections and frictions are more potent than was previously
thought. It is clear that there are important limitations on the capacity of the financial system
to deliver all of the benefits of financial innovation spelled out in section 3. But equally it
would be wrong to jump to the opposite extreme, given there are clearly major welfare gains
from improved choice of financial products and better matching of risks.
41 So what are some of the lessons for financial innovation? What will the landscape look
like in 5-10 years’ time, once the dust has settled and institutional changes can be
implemented to address the frictions identified? What if anything can policy do to facilitate or
expedite this process of adjustment?
42 A first observation is that it is important to distinguish between different financial products.
As shown in Table 1, there has been a huge dispersion in activity in different innovative
products over the past year. For example, the corporate CDS market grew by 36% in the
second half of 2007 and appears to be underpinned by strong demand. Other derivative and
option markets have also continued to grow very rapidly. But on the other hand, new issues
of corporate CDOs, CLOs and ABS CDOs have virtually completely stopped. Complex
structured products with a high premium on information requirements and with a high
bespoke element have thus fared much worse than simpler innovative instruments where
there is more natural two-way trading and liquidity. Moreover, it is important not to lose sight
that the success of some products and failure of others is a standard feature of the
innovation process and of a competitive economy.

6

See for example, Borio, C., Furfine, C and Lowe, P “Procyclicality of the financial system and financial
stability: issues and policy options” BIS paper 1, March 2001 and BIS Annual Report: The unsustainable has
run its course and policymakers face the difficult task of damage control, 30 June 2008.

7

See Box 9 – Market dynamics and options selling, pp. 60-61, Bank of England Financial Stability Review,
June 2005.

10

BIS Review 93/2008

Table 1 Growth of selected financial markets (per cent)
OTC derivatives (notional principal outstanding)
(a)
98H1 - 07H1 07H1 - 07H2
FX forwards and swaps
8.1
18.8
FX options
11.0
8.0
Interest rate swaps
28.1
13.7
Interest rate options
23.4
8.9
(a)
05H1 - 07H1 07H1 - 07H2
Credit default swaps
17.2
36.0
Asset-backed securities (issuance)
(a)
(b)
98H1 - 07H1 07H1 - 07H2 07H2 - 08Q1
Non-agency RMBS
15.7
-67.4
-67.5
CMBS
25.0
-40.9
-93.8
Auto loans
7.8
-32.5
-17.1
Credit cards
6.7
-9.8
19.0
Student loans
12.0
-56.9
-34.2
Collateralised debt obligations (issuance)
(a)
(b)
05H1 - 07H1 07H1 - 07H2 07H2 - 08Q1
Corporate CDOs
121.0
-46.0
-92.1
CLOs
42.5
-56.9
-74.4
ABS CDOs
38.7
-68.2
-85.2
Sources: BIS, Dealogic and SIFMA.
(a) Annual growth rate.
(b) Growth of annualised issuance.

43 It is vital that market forces should be decisive in determining which instruments live or
die. Regulators and supervisors should try to make the playing field as level as possible and
certainly be on the look out for regulatory distortions which unduly favour the creation of
particular products or limit the creation of other welfare-improving innovative instruments. But
the market place should decide which products match issuer and investor desires once all
risks are correctly priced.
44 Looking into a crystal ball what are some of our expectations for future financial market
developments? We will put forward 7 suggestions:
•

First, there will be additional focus on simpler, more standardised products. For
example, it would be a surprise and probably undesirable if mezzanine
resecuritisations were to reappear. Simpler products should be easier to understand
and therefore less prone to radical changes in expectations of their likely
performance. Improved stability of expectations should help sustain market liquidity
during periods of stress. Standardised products also economise on information
requirements and therefore also improve liquidity in secondary markets.

•

Second, products will be more transparent in design and content, to improve the
ease of monitoring and hence lower information costs. Increased transparency
should not be confused with reams of data. The issuance documentation for many
securitisations often contained a barrage of statistics. For CDOs of ABS, these
documents could run to thousands of pages given that the documentation for each
underlying ABS could already comprise of hundreds of pages. Any investor with the
appetite to conduct due diligence would have found this volume of information
completely indigestible. Products are likely to come with a broader range of standard
expected performance statistics.

BIS Review 93/2008

11

•

Third, as already recommended by the Financial Stability Forum and the CGFS 8 ,
rating agencies will supply additional information on the risk characteristics of rated
securities and the sensitivity and uncertainty attached to their ratings. But there will
also be increased recognition of the limitations and costs of any monitoring function
for highly complex products. That, too, will support greater standardisation and
transparency.

•

Fourth, and relatedly, end-investors will demand more explicit rules governing
acceptable collateral for securitisation and greater due diligence and risk sharing by
originators and issuers. For example, strict definitions of prime/Alt-A/sub-prime
mortgages will be required based on FICO scores, loan-to-value ratios and other
characteristics. And originators will be required to report their exposure to the
securities they issue. Contracts, for example, may require issuers to declare and
maintain a significant stake in securitisations to align their incentives to screen and
monitor loans.

•

Fifth, investment banks will continue to offer tailored products to match specific
risks. But there will be much greater recognition of the illiquidity and hence cost of
the bespoke component. Equilibrium liquidity premia will be higher. That is likely to
lower demand for such products, perhaps substantially.

•

Sixth, banks and other financial institutions will provide more information on
exposures as pressures to improve market disclosure and transparency continue.
And already regulators are assembling best practice accounting disclosures which
should become standard reporting.

•

Seventh, greater emphasis on standardisation of products may facilitate
improvements in market infrastructure. Pressure will continue for more products to
be traded on exchanges rather than OTC. That should also help control
counterparty and other operational risks.

Section 6: Conclusion
45 Financial engineering facilitates the transformation and reshaping of risk. It thus supports
the development of new products that decompose, transfer and pool risks to match user
needs. Innovation thus delivers a broadening of financial choice that enables companies and
households to improve their management of risk, with attendant gains in economic welfare.
46 There are, however, a number of frictions and market imperfections that lower the
effectiveness of financial innovation. There may be insufficient information to gauge the risk
in new financial instruments. And indeed information can get lost when a chain of parties are
involved in the creation of new financial instruments. If these parties do not retain an
economic interest in the performance of the instrument, its inherent risk can grow as
incentives to screen and monitor weaken. In addition, the benefits of tailoring the risk profile
to meet the demands of specific investors can be offset by the poor liquidity that might apply
to a bespoke component. These frictions have become much more apparent during the
credit crisis of the past year, during which time primary market issuance and secondary
market trading of some innovative financial instruments has fallen sharply.
47 Looking ahead, however, ideas are being developed to lower some of the frictions from
which innovative structured credit instruments in particular have suffered during recent
months. Removal of these frictions will, in some cases, necessitate recognition of additional

8

12

Report of the Financial Stability Forum on enhancing market and institutional resilience, 7 April 2008; Ratings
in structured finance: what went wrong and what can be done to address shortcoming, CGFS Paper 32, July
2008

BIS Review 93/2008

costs, for example in the screening of information and in the provision and cost of liquidity,
that were severely underplayed in the earlier boom in financial markets. Recognition of these
costs will, however, strengthen the resilience of the financial system and underpin the
durability of the manifold benefits from financial innovation.

BIS Review 93/2008

13

John Gieve: The financial cycle and the UK economy
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the London Stock
Exchange, London, 18 July 2008.
*

*

*

Introduction
These are troubled times for both the City and the economy more widely. After 15 years of
unbroken growth and low inflation, the prospect for the rest of this year is uncomfortable:
inflation will continue to rise sharply while growth tails off and unemployment picks up. And
the downturn is particularly pronounced in the banking sector. While the acute concerns
about funding that emerged last summer have ebbed a little since March, worries about
future losses, profitability, and even the viability of some business models, have been
growing on both sides of the Atlantic, leading to sharp falls in most equity prices and, in the
UK, to difficulties in bank rights issues.
This morning I want to say a little about the challenges this sets the MPC in the short term
but also to address some of the longer term lessons of the credit crunch.
Global imbalances and the credit crunch
One of the striking aspects of this downturn is that it started – at least in Europe – in the
financial sector. The level of defaults on lending to households and companies is still very
low. The credit squeeze here has not been, initially at least, a response to losses at home
but driven by the dramatic loss of liquidity in financial markets (Chart 1) which was set off by
the US sub-prime downturn.
One puzzle has been why that problem in one part of one country’s housing market has
triggered such global turmoil. Of course the US is not just any country. But while the numbers
may look large in absolute terms, even if sub-prime losses reach $500 billion as the IMF
have suggested 1, they will be quite modest relative to the size of the whole banking system.
The answer is that sub-prime provided only the initial spark and the fire fed on much broader
weaknesses in the financial sector, which in turn had been allowed to develop by imbalances
in the global economy.
The most striking feature of the world economy in the last decade has been the explosive
growth of China and other emerging economies. For example, since China joined the WTO
in 2001, its imports and exports have expanded on average by 25% each year, more than
twice the growth in world trade over that period.
But these countries have been reluctant to rely, in net terms at least, on foreign capital either
because of their own previous currency crises or their observation of the painful adjustment
experienced by others. Foreign direct investment has been permitted to allow the transfer of
technology and expertise but these capital flows have been re-exported through
accumulation of foreign reserves. Some countries have preferred to maximise their
production of tradeables by undervaluing their real exchange rates through fixed or heavilymanaged nominal exchange rates to the US dollar. As the absolute sizes of their economies
have increased, so have their current account surpluses and the scale of their foreign

1

http://www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/GFSR/2008/01/index.htm.

BIS Review 94/2008

1

reserve accumulation is now massive. Global foreign exchange reserves have increased
from just under $2 trillion in early 2000 to over $7 trillion in May 2008 and are forecast to
grow by $1 trillion in 2008 alone (Chart 2).
The vast excess savings of these economies needed somewhere to go. The gainers were in
the West where the asset and financial markets were most developed. The inflow brought
greater liquidity to markets and helped to create the conditions for widespread underpricing
of risk. The counterpart to the excess savings in the East became expansion of credit, the
growth of consumption and a boom in asset prices in the West. Looked at in a global
perspective, the dramatic increases in wealth and living standards in emerging economies
have been a great step forward. But the growth pattern has been unbalanced and we are
now having to handle the inevitable correction.
In that sense, the innovation that led to the exponential growth of new structured credit
markets in recent years was not just a product of new technology and more aggressive risk
taking in Western financial markets; it was also a flawed response to these wider imbalances
in the global economy.
Sources of procyclicality
But weaknesses in modern credit markets, and the “originate to distribute” model of banking,
have certainly been a good part of the problem. The development of new markets and credit
instruments has tended to amplify the financial cycle – they have been pro-cyclical in the
jargon – and has introduced or strengthened the misalignment of incentives and flawed
measures of risk.
Of course financial markets have always tended to develop a strong cycle. There is a natural
feedback between asset prices and credit availability. When credit supply increases,
households and companies who were previously credit constrained find it easier to borrow.
Their increased ability to buy assets bids up prices. And these higher-priced assets can be
used as collateral to secure loans. So as asset prices rise, so does collateral, thereby
increasing the willingness of banks to supply credit.
But in recent years this has been reinforced by some structural and regulatory changes. The
growth of credit risk transfer through securitisation has tended to increase the proportion of
banks’ balance sheets that come under mark-to-market accounting. Even gradual changes in
the values of the underlying loans have tended to appear as abrupt changes in banks’
trading and treasury books. When liquidity was abundant, asset values were high and
marked-to-market profits were high. Now that liquidity is scarce and asset values lower,
mark-to-market losses and write-downs are high.
The widespread use of credit ratings in valuing assets and managing counterparty credit risk
has also had an impact. Credit rating agencies try to rate through the cycle. And for
corporate ratings they may well succeed. But for some structured finance products, such as
re-securitisations of sub-prime backed securities they (like many others) misjudged the
impact of a downturn in the cycle and the non linearity of returns. As a result, there have
been wholesale downgrades of the credit ratings of structured securities over the past 12
months. The problem for the financial system is that these ratings are often hard-wired into
decision making. Certain classes of investors are forced to sell assets when they lose a AAA
or investment grade rating.
Remuneration structures have also amplified risk taking in the upswing. Two features of
remuneration in the financial industry are that they are asymmetric (there is unlimited upside
for high performance but a floor on the downside) and tend to be based on short-term
targets. The asymmetry in reward creates an incentive to gamble and short-term
performance targets encourage traders to follow rather than counter a deviation from longrun fundamentals. Even where the incentives were paid in options linked to the medium-term
performance of the employer, the apparent rewards have been highly cyclical.
2

BIS Review 94/2008

In addition, regulation can also encourage procyclical risk taking. Basel I, for example,
encouraged the growth of securitisation and the “originate to distribute” model of banking
because holding the low risk elements of a loan portfolio in the banking book were relatively
heavily capital-weighted. Basel II contains more carefully calibrated capital risk-weights and
is a considerable improvement over Basel I. But the risk measures are drawn from the
market and share some procyclical features. Weights increase as credit risk rises so riskweighted assets will seem relatively low during tranquil economic times and relatively high
during periods of stress. While there may be scope within Pillar II to address this, it is too
early to know whether that can be used effectively.
The combination of these market and regulatory effects have amplified risk taking during the
boom and is now constraining risk appetite as financial conditions have deteriorated.
Policy responses
Since the crisis broke last summer, regulators, governments and central banks have come
together in the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) to analyse what has gone wrong and agree
an international response. Its recommendations have been approved by the IMF and the G8
and include a range of measures to fill particular gaps or put right particular faults in the
regulatory system by:
•

strengthening prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management;
implementing Basle II and requiring more capital against, for example, off-balancesheet vehicles, securitisations and tail risk;

•

enhancing transparency and valuation particularly for complex structured
financial products and off-balance sheet vehicles;

•

changing the role and uses of rating agencies, including by distinguishing ratings
of corporates and structured products;

•

strengthening the authorities’ responsiveness to risk; and

•

increasing the robustness of arrangements for dealing with financial stress;
ensuring central banks’ operational frameworks are flexible enough to deal with
extraordinary situations in money markets and mechanisms for dealing with weak or
failing banks are put in place.

More generally we are discussing in the FSF how the authorities can go further in moderating
the financial cycle.
Of course monetary policy can play a role in this. One goal of monetary policy is to stabilise
the economy in the face of shocks and central banks have always looked at credit and
money growth as important indicators of the state of the economy. The rapid growth of credit
in 2006 for example was one factor leading the MPC to start raising interest rates. However
central banks have been wary of putting a lot of weight on disciplining financial markets by
changing interest rates. Famously Alan Greenspan asked “But how do we know when
irrational exuberance has unduly escalated asset values, which then become subject to
unexpected and prolonged contractions..?”
There are two good reasons for care. First policy has to be appropriate for the whole
economy; the interest rates which would be needed to have a significant effect, say, on the
growth of house prices in recent years might have been far too high for other industries.
Secondly central bankers have been cautious to put much weight on their own assessments
of when an increase in asset prices is becoming unsustainable. If they get the judgement
wrong, they risk slowing growth needlessly and bring inflation persistently below target.
Even if central bankers put more weight in future on their judgements of excesses in financial
markets, it seems highly desirable also to make the regulatory system more counter-cyclical.

BIS Review 94/2008

3

A number of proposals have recently been put forward, which would have the effect of
directly increasing a bank's capital requirements during an economic upturn and allow room
for capital requirements to fall in a downturn. For instance Professors Goodhart and Persaud
have put forward a scheme linking a bank's capital to the growth in its assets. Another
possibility is to learn from the Spanish system of requiring banks to set aside general
provisions against their loan book in good times which can be a cushion against losses in the
downturn. There are some drawbacks to each of these particular proposals but we are
discussing the best approach both with the FSA and with our international colleagues in the
FSF.
Current challenges for the MPC
Making sure we do set in place capital and liquidity regimes which dampen the next cyclical
upswing in financial markets is important. More immediately, we also have to deal with the
present conjuncture and I want to finish this talk with some reflections on that.
If the sharp credit squeeze was the only challenge we faced, the Monetary Policy Committee
would be expected to continue reducing rates to mitigate the risks of an excessive fall in
demand and in inflation in the medium term. But of course we do face another simultaneous
shock, the sharp rise in commodity prices, which is driving up inflation across the world. And
that raises the question whether we should be raising rates rather than reducing them.
Moreover recently each month seems to have brought more worrying news on both fronts.
The cost shock
In the May Inflation Report, the Committee forecast a pickup in inflation to well over 3 per
cent, above target and driven in large part by the huge rises we have seen in energy and
food prices (Chart 3). Since those projections were put together, oil prices have risen a
further 20% and food prices by a further 5%. And the Consumer Price Index has risen faster
than we were expecting, reaching 3.8% in June. We are a little behind the US where inflation
now stands at 5% or the Euro area where it has reached 4% but the gap is expected to
continue to narrow. The peak monthly rate will depend on the exact timing of energy price
rises but we are expecting inflation to be well over 4% for much of the rest of the year.
Of course, not all prices are rising so quickly. The prices of clothing and footwear fell by
almost 8% over the past year. And the price of durable goods like plasma TVs has been
falling even faster. But it is the rising cost of regularly purchased essential goods, like food
and petrol, which attract most attention and probably drive people’s inflation expectations,
which have continued to drift up.
This increase reflects in large measure a rise in world prices for commodities which we
cannot avoid, but we must ensure that it is only a temporary spike and that inflation returns to
target when this year’s increases fall out of the index in a year’s time. Above all that means
ensuring that the higher rate of inflation does not become embedded in the expectations and
behaviour of wage and price setters. The fact is that when their relative prices rise we cannot
avoid a transfer to the producers of oil and other commodities, because they are difficult to
substitute out of. That transfer is bound to hit real wages one way or another but the more
that is resisted and nominal wages are pushed up, the greater the cost is likely to be in
unemployment and slower growth.
We have no direct lever on public expectations. We need not just to assert our determination
to bring inflation back to target but ensure that our words are credible. So, in setting interest
rates we need not just to assess the balance between supply and demand pressures in the
economy which will set the context for price and wage decisions in the medium term, but also
ensure that our decisions are understood and seen to respond to the economic
developments in inflation and output that people are experiencing.

4

BIS Review 94/2008

It is clear that with inflation rising well above target we need a period of slower growth to
create a margin of spare capacity. The questions we discuss and reconsider each month are
how big a margin is necessary and what level of interest rates is needed to bring it about.
The Credit Crunch
On the scale of the necessary output gap, for example, we need to take account of the
supply effects of the doubling of oil prices and the impact of migration. On the other side we
need to judge how sharp a slowdown is already in train.
In deciding the necessary level of interest rates we need not just to focus on the level of
Bank Rate. We need also to take account of the impact of the turmoil in the banking sector
which is now leading to a fierce squeeze on credit especially in the housing market but not
just there. The increase in bank margins over safe rates have offset the cuts we have made
to Bank Rate since last summer and the tightening of other conditions have introduced some
quantity restrictions which are not fully captured in price. Our credit conditions survey
suggests that this squeeze may intensify in the coming months.
Timely sources of data suggest that the economy is already slowing fast. The CIPS survey
balances are now pointing to a contraction in activity in manufacturing, construction and
services (Chart 4). House prices and transaction numbers are falling rapidly with direct
effects on house builders and related services. And while there are winners as well as losers
from lower house prices, there are signs that the housing market is affecting consumer
confidence. More broadly, there are signs that the tightening of credit conditions is beginning
to affect both consumption and investment. Most importantly, the sharp increases in
commodity prices are squeezing real take-home pay which is bound to impact on
consumption at some point.
Conclusion
I began this speech by highlighting how the recent events in financial markets have been
facilitated by the integration of emerging economies into the global economy. Of course, I
could make an even closer link with rising commodity prices. The rapid expansion in activity
in these economies has inevitably put pressure on the global price of energy and other raw
materials, whose supply is relatively fixed at least in the short run. That is showing up in
rising inflation world wide (Chart 5).
So is it right to conclude, as some have, that the path of inflation is determined abroad?
Certainly commodity prices have an effect in the short run. But it is domestic monetary policy
– the decisions that the Monetary Policy Committee take each month, together with the
overarching framework that defines our target – that determines the path UK inflation in the
medium-run. The MPC will continue to assess the balance between the risks of higher
inflation from the commodity cost shock and the downside risks to output (and to inflation in
the medium term) from the credit crunch. But I can assure you that we will do whatever it
takes to bring inflation back to target in the medium term.

BIS Review 94/2008

5

Chart 1: Financial Market Liquidity

Chart 2: EME holdings of FX reserves

Liquidity index
1.0

Per cent

0.8

40

0.6

35

0.4

30

0.2
+
0.0
0.2

0

08

1

Chart 3: Brent Oil Prices
Nominal

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

0
2001

-5
2000

06

1.2

1999

04

5

1998

02

1.0

1997

00

2

10

1996

98

3

1995

96

4

15

0.8

94

5

20

0.6

92

6

US$ (RHS)
Annual percentage change (LHS)

25

0.4

90

US$tr

Chart 4: Survey-based measures of activity
Construction

US dollars (2008) per barrel

Real

Index: 50 = no change

Services

140

70

Manufacturing

65

120

60

100

55

80

50

60

45

40

40

20

1960

1968

1976

1984

1992

2000

0
2008

35
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Source: CIPS

Chart 5: Global inflation
Per cent
9

EMEs
UK
US
Euro Area

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

2003

6

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

BIS Review 94/2008

Charles Bean: Business surveys and monetary policy
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor (Monetary Policy) of the Bank of England, at
the CBI Industrial Trends Survey 50th Anniversary Reception, Centre Point, London, 24 July
2008.
*

*

*

Good evening! It is a great pleasure to be asked to say a few words to mark the 50th birthday
of the CBI’s Industrial Trends survey. The birthday boy and I have, in fact, been acquainted
with each other for over thirty years – from when I started my professional career in 1975 as
a forecaster in the Treasury. In those days, the quarterly Industrial Trends survey was really
the only game in town as far as business surveys go. Since then, the field has become more
crowded, but the Industrial Trends survey remains a key source of information about
business developments.
To celebrate the survey’s birthday, I thought that I might say a few words tonight about the
part played by business surveys, and intelligence about business conditions more generally,
in our setting of Bank Rate each month. Because our interest rate decisions affect UK
economic activity and inflation with a rather long, and sometimes rather variable, lag, there is
nothing much that we can do to affect the current and near-term rate of inflation. That is
already largely baked into the cake. Instead we have to focus on inflation prospects in the
medium term – that is, two years or so ahead. So we therefore need to form a judgement on
where the economy is likely to be heading. But to do that, we need to start by figuring out
where we are now.
The great Danish physicist Niels Bohr is supposed to have observed that “Prediction is very
difficult, especially about the future.” But I don’t think he realised just how tough economic
forecasting is. Not only is the MPC unsure of the prospects for commodity prices, how the
credit crunch will play out and a myriad of other future events, but we don’t even have a
precise picture of the current state of the economy. As a result, controlling the economy has
been likened to driving along a winding road looking only in the rear-view mirror. Indeed, it’s
worse than that as we don’t even have that good a view of where it has been in the past
either! It is as if the rear window is also a bit misted up.
Our primary signposts are, of course, the official data provided by the Office for National
Statistics for the key macroeconomic variables, such as output, spending, employment,
prices, wages and so on. However, we do not rely on the official data exclusively, for a
number of reasons. First, it takes time for the official data to be collated and published. For
instance, the preliminary estimate of GDP growth in Q2 only appears tomorrow, almost a
month after the quarter ended.
Second, early official estimates are often based on incomplete samples, with missing
information extrapolated from other indicators. As more information accrues over time, so the
data gradually then get revised. And significant revisions can still occur for some years after
the event. For an example, look at Chart 1. This plots the initial and current official estimates
of four-quarter UK GDP growth, as well as the range of the intervening estimates. As you can
see, the picture provided by the mature data sometimes looks quite different to that furnished
by the first estimates. For instance, the initial estimates suggested a sharp slowdown in 1998
in the wake of the Asia and Long-Term Capital Management crises, whereas the current
estimates suggest that the pace of expansion barely eased. For more recent quarters, the
initial and current estimates are closer together, but that may simply reflect the comparative
youth of the latest estimates, as well as the fact that the 2007 Blue Book did not involve a full
balancing of the National Accounts.

BIS Review 95/2008

1

Finally, even mature data that has gone through the full revision process may still not give a
fully accurate picture because of the intrinsic difficulty of measuring a particular economic
concept, for instance the value added by the financial sector. In such cases, the ONS are
instead forced to employ proxies, but sometimes these are just not all that good a guide.
The need to form as up-to-date and reliable a picture of the current state of the economy as
possible means that the MPC makes extensive use of business surveys alongside the official
data. That includes not only the quarterly Industrial Trends survey and its monthly sibling, but
also the other, more recent, CBI surveys, such as those covering the distributive trades and
service sectors. The various surveys carried out by other organisations, such as the
Chartered Institute of Purchasing Supply and the British Chambers of Commerce, are also
valuable sources of information for us. Moreover, we have our own network of 12 regional
agencies, whose role is to collect intelligence as to what is happening on the ground.
Collectively, our regional Agents have about 8000 business contacts and they represent an
important additional source of timely information for us.
The uses of the survey data are varied. First, different indicators more often than not seem to
tell different stories and we need to figure out which is the right one. For instance, at the
current juncture, there is a marked discrepancy between the official data on the volume of
retail spending, which points to considerable robustness this year – including whopping
growth of 3.6% in May alone, though that was fully reversed in today’s release for June – and
the Distributive Trades survey, which suggests significant weakness (see Chart 2). While the
ONS have suggested that the official data are likely to be better at picking up small retailers
and unconventional shopping channels, such as internet purchases, the conformity of the
picture given by the Distributive Trades survey with other potential indicators of spending,
such as consumer confidence and the Agents reports, have led us to place less weight on
the official data on retail spending for the present.

2

BIS Review 95/2008

The surveys will not always provide the best coincident guide, however. For instance, during
the 1999-2002 period, the official data suggested greater swings in manufacturing output
growth than did the Industrial Trends survey (see Chart 3). Now, during this period, we know
that there was a rapid expansion in ICT-related activities, followed by a sharp contraction.
The simple balance of “ups” over “downs” in the Industrial Trends survey could therefore be
expected to have failed to reflect adequately the sharp movements in that sub-sector’s
activity. So, for this period, the official data probably gave a better picture of what was going
on.

BIS Review 95/2008

3

A second use of surveys is in the application of forward-looking questions to form a view of
the near-term outlook. In that regard, questions on business and consumer confidence, and
on the trend in orders and backlogs, can give some indication of likely trends in output and
spending. The surveys are also useful in forming an assessment of the prospects for capital
spending, as this is an area where statistical models are particularly poor – and I should
know, having spent some of my formative years at the Treasury unsuccessfully trying to build
econometric models to predict investment! Both the CBI and BCC surveys collect information
on investment intentions, and it is also something we ask our Agents to take a view on,
based on their contact interviews (see Chart 4). We look closely at this information when
assessing the outlook for business investment.

Other forward-looking questions can also prove valuable. For instance, at the current
juncture, with CPI inflation well above our 2% target, we need to judge how much further it
will rise and for how long that might persist. Past experience gives us some guide as to the
speed at which higher commodity prices pass down the supply chain and the extent to which
those movements are amplified or attenuated by movements in other costs and prices. But
the questions on pricing intentions contained in the business surveys represent a valuable
additional source of information on near-term inflation pressures.
A third use of surveys is in helping the MPC diagnose the causes of recent developments.
Here, the quarterly Industrial Trends survey stands out as particularly useful because it has a
rich set of questions that explore companies concerns. For example, it has questions about
the factors limiting investment, exports, and output. Responses to those sorts of questions
can, for instance, help us work out how businesses have been affected by the recent
depreciation of sterling, and the tightening in credit conditions.
A fourth use of the surveys is in providing measures of variables for which there is no official
counterpart. In particular, the amount of economic slack in the economy is a key determinant
of inflationary pressures. We have official indicators of slack in the labour market –
unemployment, vacancies and the like – which is one factor determining pay growth. But we
have no official measures of the amount of slack within businesses, which potentially affects
pricing pressures. Business surveys such as the Industrial Trends survey do, however, ask
how intensively firms are working their capital (see Chart 5). And the MPC draws on this

4

BIS Review 95/2008

information in forming a judgement about the overall margin of spare resources in the
economy.

A fifth, and perhaps less obvious, use of survey information is in refining our picture of the
past. I noted earlier that the official data tends to get revised for some while after it is first
released. But it turns out that there are some systematic patterns in the historical revision
process. Moreover, for some series, we have found a tendency for revisions to be in the
direction of reducing the discrepancy with the corresponding survey information. So rather
than just taking the latest vintage of official data at face value, we can employ statistical
techniques to exploit this information in order to refine our assessment of the past.
An example of this approach, drawn from our May Inflation Report, is shown in Chart 6. This
shows our assessment of the range of possible final outturns for four-quarter GDP growth
rates for the past six years. The current vintage of official GDP growth data is shown by the
green line. The centre of the darkest purple band of the fan reflects our view of the most
likely path once the revisions process is complete – a “backcast”, if you like. The fan around
this path indicates the uncertainty around this projection, with a 9 in 10 chance of the
eventual outturn lying somewhere inside it. The width of this fan is based on the historical
experience of data revisions. The fan becomes progressively narrower the further back in
time one goes, reflecting the reduced incidence of revisions for more distant periods. For the
recent past, the most likely path for the mature estimates of growth lies above the current
vintage of data, reflecting our judgement that the business surveys and the past history of
revisions together make it somewhat more likely that the official estimates for this period will
in future be revised up, rather than down.

BIS Review 95/2008

5

I hope that this gives you a sense of the use we make of business surveys, and business
intelligence more generally, in making our regular assessment of the state of the economy
each month, before taking our decision on the appropriate level of Bank Rate. The timeliness
of this information is particularly important at the current juncture, when the economic climate
is changing rapidly. The global and UK economies have been subject to two large shocks of
uncertain magnitude, duration and impact. The first is the continuing de-leveraging in the
banking system and the attendant squeeze on the terms and availability of credit. The
second is the fairly relentless rise in commodity prices, especially that of oil, driven in part by
the robust growth in demand in the emerging economies. These two shocks both depress
output growth, though they have divergent effects on inflation.
In our May Inflation Report, our central expectation was for four-quarter GDP growth to slow
markedly through this year, reflecting both subdued real income growth and tighter credit
supply (see Chart 7, which also includes the same backcast information as Chart 6). It was
then expected to gradually recover through 2009 as credit conditions slowly improved. The
corresponding projection for CPI inflation is shown in Chart 8 (note that no uncertainty is
shown for the past, as the data for CPI inflation are rarely revised). Our central projection
was for inflation to continue to rise during the second half of this year to a peak close to 4%
and then – assuming that oil prices stabilised – to fall back towards the 2% target as the
growing margin of spare capacity in the economy held back pay and price increases. Since
May, inflation has turned out higher than expected and oil prices have risen further,
notwithstanding some moderation in the past week or so. But the news on activity has not
been very good either, with some distinctly downbeat business surveys, including
yesterday’s Industrial Trends survey, further weakening in the housing market and continued
fragility in the financial sector. All this points to a worse near-term prospect for both growth
and inflation. The net impact of this on the outlook for inflation in the medium term is less
clear, though for our considered view on that, you will have to wait until our August Inflation
Report is published in a couple of weeks time.

6

BIS Review 95/2008

Moreover, there are considerable risks surrounding the central outlook. A particular risk on
the upside is that the extended period of elevated inflation leads to an acceleration in pay
and causes inflation expectations to rise. That could lead the higher inflation to become
embedded. But on the downside, there is a risk that the credit crunch leads to a deeper and
more prolonged slowdown, leading to greater slack in the economy and causing inflation to
undershoot our target.
In setting policy, we have been trying to balance off these risks against each other. In making
that judgement, the more accurate a picture we have of the economy, the better. So the
Industrial Trends survey, as well as the other business surveys, will continue to be a crucial

BIS Review 95/2008

7

input into forming that picture. Let me therefore conclude by wishing Many Happy Returns to
the Industrial Trends survey on the occasion of its 50th birthday. We hope that you and your
younger siblings will continue to flourish in the years ahead. Thank you!

8

BIS Review 95/2008

Paul Tucker: Remarks on “Making Monetary Policy by Committee”
Discussant remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary
Policy Committee of the Bank of England, on “Making Monetary Policy by Committee” by
Alan Blinder, at the Bank of Canada Conference “International experience with the conduct
of monetary policy under inflation targeting”, Ottawa, 22-23 July 2008.
* * *
Central banking involves a lot of learning – by doing, by thinking, researching, and by
comparing ourselves with our peers. At the core of that learning process is exchanges
amongst central bankers themselves, much of it in Basel. The other rich seam is the
academic literature. But relatively few turn (or return) to scholarly reflection after periods of
alternatively practising and theorising about central banking.
Alan Blinder has therefore provided a signal service, since stepping down as Vice Chairman
of the Federal Reserve Board, through his series of papers on monetary policy practice and
how it both draws on and fuels theory.
Today’s paper, on the role of committees in the making of monetary policy 1, places central
banks into categories Blinder first set out a few years ago: single decision taker; autocrat-led
college; genuinely-collegial; individualistic. It is especially interesting to the Bank of England,
where for just over a decade we have operated a one-member/one-vote system for deciding
our policy rate. As Blinder rightly says, comparatively speaking, this is clearly at the
‘individualistic’ end of the spectrum, and is a rare example of the species.
I have comments in three areas: the political economy genesis of the UK’s system; how it
bears on the communication of monetary policy or what Blinder called the ‘cacophony
problem’; and a plea for Blinder to widen his enquiries beyond interest-rate setting.
Political economy and one-member/one-vote
Modern Britain has no tradition of non-elected officials taking major executive decisions
affecting the whole of the nation. This is in marked contrast to say the US where, at Federal
level, the President is the only member of the executive to have reached office via the ballot
box. Nor in the living memory of the UK people have we had any crises of democracy, so we
have not developed national institutions, such as Germany’s Bundesbank, whose place in
society was not mediated via our democratic processes. In consequence, when debates
about the possibility of central bank independence got underway in earnest from the mid1980s, a widely perceived stumbling block was that central bank officials could not account
personally for their decisions on the Floor of the House (of Commons). There was a
democratic deficit.
Resolution came via the political cost of the failure of other approaches to monetary policy, in
which Ministers running for re-election decided rates; the happenstance of the development
during the 1980s and 1990s of influential committees of Parliament, before which central

1

See http://econ2008.bankofcanada-conference.ca/wp-content/blinder.pdf

BIS Review 96/2008

1

bankers could (and frequently do) appear; and specific design features of the monetary
regime itself. 2 Those included
-

Parliament, in legislation, enshrining the goal of price stability, and requiring the Bank to
publish a quarterly report on the outlook for stability

-

the executive arm of government deciding the definition of price stability (2% CPI
inflation target) and setting out requirements for the Bank to explain publicly what is
going on if the target is missed on either side by more than 1pp

-

the Committee comprising four ‘external’ members as well as five internal (or
‘executive’) members.

The external members were necessary to legitimise giving such an important function to the
Bank. ‘One person/one vote’, with transparency, was a mechanism for attracting high-quality
‘externals’ and for ensuring that the introduction of ‘new blood’ made a difference – that it did
let in ‘fresh air’ and bring useful expertise to the table. And, of course, the system of
individual voting had to carry across to the ‘internals’ too. Indeed, as most studies show,
there is no difference between internal and external members in our decision-taking.
The burden of that rehearsal of some UK institutional history is this: that, in comparing
central bank practices, we should not think of our various decision-taking structures solely as
technical solutions to the shared technical problem of deciding a path for rates. Rather, our
varying structures are efforts to solve that shared technical problem in the context of varying
histories and social and political structures. We should understand each other, and adopt
and adapt what could usefully travel across borders, but not proselytise.
Communications, and forecasts
If, adapting Mike Woodford, monetary policy is nearly all about expectations, then
communication matters hugely in real-world policy making (a world in which rational
expectations don’t hold and so one in which we cannot passively rely on households and
firms just getting it right by observing our actions). I agree entirely with Blinder that what
kinds of communication are feasible and effective will vary according to the type of
decision-taking structure a central bank employs.
In the Bank of England’s case, given one member/one vote, the challenge is how to achieve
a sensible balance of centripetal and centrifugal forces. How this plays out varies across the
different dimensions of monetary policy: the objective, ‘model’ of the economy, reaction
function, month-by-month decisions, and forecasts, and so on.
As already noted, the objective is laid down by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. As well as
helping to fill the democratic deficit, this coheres with a one person/one vote committee. The
structure would not work well if different members were free to form our own views on the
objective. Amongst other things, that would mean that as the composition of the MPC
changed, the objective could change. This also underpins the utility of the UK MPC’s
objective unequivocally giving primacy to inflation; in the jargon, the objective is
lexicographic, with ‘avoiding unnecessary volatility in output and employment’ occupying a
subsidiary role. This means that we can and do make judgments about the period over which
we should return inflation to target in the wake of a cost shock, notably at present. But we are
not in a position where individual members could choose to subordinate the achievement of
price stability to that of stabilising output.

2

2

For a more extended discussion, see Tucker P M W (2007) ‘Central Banking and Political Economy: the
example of the UK’s Monetary Policy Committee’ speech at Inflation Targeting, Central Bank Independence
and Transparency Conference, Cambridge, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q3 2007, pp 445-452.

BIS Review 96/2008

At the other end of the spectrum, our month-by-month votes on Bank Rate are individualistic
in precisely Blinder’s sense. And, as he says, that has clear implications for how we convey
those decisions. The minutes take primacy. That is partly because it is more difficult for us
than for some of our peers to release an informative statement immediately after the policy
meeting: if you don’t know what you’re going to decide, it is pretty hard to prepare a draft in
advance! Each individual member is obviously in a position to summarise their views. But we
could not sensibly have nine individual statements without risking what Alan Blinder calls
cacophony. Also, such statements would have to be prepared in advance, so there would
probably be less listening and engagement at the policy meeting itself. At the other end of
the spectrum, finding ‘the average’ for a collective Committee statement is tough in the short
time available, except where a majority has decided to change Bank Rate, or where ‘no
change’ is driven by some clear common factors that it would be unreasonable to withhold
from the public sphere until publication of the minutes a fortnight later.
‘Individualism’ is also reflected in our public speeches and appearances before Parliament.
Those individual exercises range widely – from assessments of the conjuncture, through
examinations of particular parts of the transmission mechanism, to reflections on monetarypolicy making more generally. 3 But whatever the subject or scope, we are each speaking for
ourselves, not for the Committee as a whole.
Taken together, all this plainly sets up centrifugal forces, or Blinder’s ‘cacophony problem’.
As put that matters, since it is of course the systematic component of monetary policy that is
doing the work in stabilising nominal trends. Households, firms, the financial markets need to
figure out what the Committee – or, somehow, its marginal member(s) – thinks is going on in
the economy and how it will react in setting Bank Rate (‘our’ reaction function).
But there are centripetal influences too. I shall highlight two.
First, the aim of each member is not to be in a minority but for their preferred level of Bank
Rate to be that chosen by a majority of the Committee. This means that, in addition to
clarifying our own thoughts, we are up to a point in the business of persuasion. Ours is not a
system of postal voting. It is a system of listening to and learning from each other.
Second, with qualifications, some of the MPC’s communications are relatively more
collective. In particular, our communications on a broadly shared ‘model’ of how the economy
works, and our forecasts of the outlook for growth and inflation.
In 1998, the (then) Committee published a paper on the Monetary Transmission Mechanism;
and, in a 2007 paper to the Treasury Select Committee of Parliament, we described our view
of material changes in the workings of the economy during the Committee’s first ten years.
Both were agreed, collegiate-like documents, while not committing every member to every
proposition.
Much the same can be said of our quarterly forecasts and Inflation Reports, which play a
central role in the MPC’s system. Our forecasts are the projections of the policymakers not
the supporting analytical staff. It is striking that the ‘individualistic’ MPC publishes a common
forecast, whereas the somewhat more-collegial FOMC has long published information (the
central tendency and range) about the forecasts of its individual members (without the
names). The FOMC’s approach allows the range of central projections to be transparent. It is

3

See Tucker, P M W, ‘Reflections on operating inflation targeting’, speech at the Graduate School of
Business, University of Chicago, July 2006, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q2 2006, pp 212-224.
Kate Barker, ‘Monetary Policy in the UK – The Framework and current issues’ delivered at the National
Association of Business Economics Policy Conference, Washington DC, March 2005, Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin Q2 2005, pp 276-282.
Rachel Lomax ‘The MPC comes of age’, a speech delivered at De Montford University, February 2007,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q1 2007, pp 106-111.
Charlie Bean ‘Inflation Targeting: the UK experience’, speech at the Annual Congress of the German
Economic Association, October 2003, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q4 2003, pp 479-494.

BIS Review 96/2008

3

quite different in kind from the fan charts we publish in the UK, showing the band of
uncertainty around central projections for output growth and inflation. Our ‘fans’ are not, as is
sometimes suggested, a way of encompassing the central view of each of the nine individual
members; they reflect collective discussion and agreement. Mutual engagement would not
be needed if we were in the business of publishing nine individual fan charts. Frequently, we
do indicate in the Inflation Report that different members assign different weights to the
various risks around the central projection. And to be clear, individual members are not
constrained to be part of the collective forecast; if our differences were sufficiently material,
we could make that clear quantitatively in the Inflation Report. But, if at any point, all nine
members did so, the centrifugal elements of our individualistic system could, it seems to me,
lead to genuine cacophony. In the interests of effective policy, the Committee as a whole
therefore has an interest in setting up some centripetal influences, without making them a
binding constraint on individual members.
Thus, the publications on the transmission mechanism and on the economic outlook provide
a broad, common platform for readers to use when making sense of our individual
pronouncements. My hunch is that this gives us greater scope for articulating our individual
views without creating misleading impressions. For example, a paper I delivered last year on
Money and Credit 4 went into more detail on those parts of the transmission mechanism than
any collective statement, or than my colleagues might wish to go.
I have found that helpful in recent months, as a few comments on the current conjuncture
might illustrate. My take at our recent July meeting was, broadly, that since the May Inflation
Report, the near-term outlook for inflation had deteriorated, underlining the risk that the rise
in commodity prices will feed through to wage and price setting. The outlook for demand and
output had also deteriorated, which in degree should help to contain those upside risks to
inflation. Going forward, a key judgment will be whether the prospective slowdown will be
sufficient to bring inflation back to target with the current level of Bank Rate, taking into
account the tightening in some broader measures of monetary conditions. The final point is
what I want to highlight in the context of my remarks today. Given a marked increase in credit
rationing in capital markets and bank lending, the conventionally measured short-term riskfree real rate may not be the same summary statistic of monetary conditions as before the
turmoil. It is currently necessary to undertake a richer analysis of monetary and credit
conditions, which had been the broad theme of my earlier paper. But those remarks about
money and credit were nested within a broadly common approach to the transmission
mechanism and policy.
To recap, the MPC’s more collective statements make us free to do our duty in revealing our
individual thoughts without creating a misleading perception of cacophony when it is not
really there.
The challenge for central banks with different decision-taking structures would seem to be
the opposite: (i) how to allow a range of views to be explored seriously so as to avoid
intellectual or analytical inertia – or how to let in fresh air; and (ii) in terms of communications,
how to demonstrate that there is true debate without individual pronouncements being
confused with the collective pronouncements on policy made typically by the Chair.
I think forecasts are central to this. And I would encourage Alan Blinder and his collaborators
to extend their work on the production and role of forecasts in the decision-making of
different central banks; and how the communication of forecasts interacts with the
communication of other elements of the policy process.

4

4

See Tucker, P M W, ‘Money and credit: banking and the macroeconomy’, speech at the Monetary Policy and
the Markets Conference, 13 December 2007, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q1 2008, pp 96-106.

BIS Review 96/2008

Other bits of central banking
Finally, and briefly, I would observe that Blinder’s work on decision-taking processes and
structures has so far focused entirely on the setting of interest rates. We have been living
through a decade or more in which, at many although not all central banks, other decisions
affected the financial landscape and risks to stability. Again drawing on his experience as the
Vice Chairman of the Fed Board and again comparing and contrasting different approaches,
I think we would all benefit enormously if Alan Blinder took his scholarly apparatus and spirit
of enquiry into other corners of central banking and how they fit together.

BIS Review 96/2008

5

Paul Tucker: Money and credit, twelve months on
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy
Committee of the Bank of England, at the Money, Macro and Finance Research Group 40th
Annual Conference, Birkbeck College, London, 12 September 2008.
*

*

*

As many people have said, this is a challenging time for policymakers. But the real challenge
is for households and firms in the real world who are having to navigate the fallout from the
extraordinary combination of financial and commodity shocks rippling through the world
economy. Our job as policymakers is to make that process as smooth as it can be over the
medium term. And having our eye on the medium term means we must ensure that the gains
of the past ten-to-fifteen years in stabilising inflation are not frittered away.
In confronting that task, policymakers are having both to make big picture judgments about
the balance of forces buffeting the UK economy; and to apply areas of economic theory that
stretch the frontiers of existing research. So, in joining your research conference this
morning, I want to sketch, broadly, what the current conjuncture suggests, from the
policymaker’s perspective, should feature in the future research agenda of monetary
economists.
The current conjuncture, and policy
By way of establishing the context, I will begin with the Bank of England’s most recent
economic forecast. In August, the Monetary Policy Committee published our latest
projections for output growth and inflation. On the then profile of market interest rates, the
Committee as a whole 1 judged that, most likely, output growth would slow quite sharply
during the current year and would be anaemic for a period thereafter. Crucially, the balance
of risks to that most likely (or modal) outlook was judged to be on the downside. In other
words, the mean forecast for output was somewhat weaker still. For inflation, meanwhile, the
most likely outlook was that, after an uncomfortably high and protracted spike, it would fall
back to a little below the 2% target by the end of two years, and would continue to drift down
thereafter. In other words, the crucial judgment was that the accumulation and persistence of
slack in the economy would most likely be enough to avoid inflation getting out of control.
That was the part of the August projections that captured the attention of the markets and
commentators.
But, collectively, we also concluded that the balance of risks to the inflation outlook was to
the upside, so that the mean for inflation was actually above the 2% target at around two
years or so. That’s not without significance given that most analytical models suggest that
policymakers should set policy in the light of the mean, not the mode – although a better
description of the MPC’s approach would be to say that we take account of the nature of the
entire distribution of risks. 2

1

See Tucker, PMWT, 2008 “Making monetary policy by Committee” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2008
Q3 (forthcoming) for some thoughts on the relatively collective nature of the MPC’s forecasts given its one
person, one vote decisions on Bank Rate.

2

I have to say that the textbook stress on the mean (or expected value) might be somewhat overdone in some
circumstances, in particular where the mean is materially influenced by certain types of low probability/high
impact risks. I hope the following will illustrate that. Imagine, not in the current context, that there is a risk of a
dollar collapse against the euro, the currency of the UK’s largest trading partner, but without a similar risk of
sterling collapsing. Say the probability is judged to be low, but the impact large; so that, in the
probability-weighted way, it is enough to shift the mean outlook for future inflation. If (if) the risk crystallised,

BIS Review 112/2008

1

Now, putting this together, the following inference can be drawn; and I hope that I shall be
excused if I plod through this in slow motion. Focusing on a roughly two-year horizon, if
inflation was most likely to be below target in the context of the August modal forecast for
output, then it would be even further below target if the MPC’s view in August of the
downside risks to growth were to materialise (ie consistent with the mean path for output but
no further adverse shock to costs). But, in fact, the mean path for inflation was above target
at around two years. That underlines the hefty upside risk to inflation that featured in the
Committee’s August projections.
Indeed, we cannot be remotely complacent about the risks in either direction. This is a
delicate balance, and one that is developing from month to month. It is a convenient but in
some ways misleading shorthand to characterise the Committee as currently balancing a
growth risk against an inflation risk. Given our mandate – and, indeed, given how the
economy works – that is better thought of as our having to balance the downside risks to
inflation over the medium-term against the upside risks to inflation over the medium-term. So,
perhaps contrary to some recent commentary, the MPC remains as focused on medium-term
inflation as ever. No shift in the underlying reaction function. No shift in the aversion to
inflation (or to deflation). But, of course, the current environment is highly unusual and our
reaction function cannot be written down as a fully specified state-contingent rule; and so
everyone is discovering that we truly are committed to low inflation in the medium term.
The mandate is expressed in terms of stable low inflation because that is what central banks
can deliver over the medium term, and because nominal stability is a precondition for
sustainable growth.
There is not a comfortable medium-term trade off between growth and inflation. Inflation is
just the opposite of a free lunch. If in the interests of sustaining growth in the short run, we
were to risk letting inflation become established at higher levels, things could easily get out of
control as higher medium-term inflation expectations would become embedded. We would
then find it much harder to bring inflation back to target, and could well end up having to
generate a serious recession to put the genie back in the bottle. The experience of the thirty
years before the current regime demonstrated the economic and social costs – to
households, livelihoods and businesses – of what that entails. The MPC’s inflation targeting
mandate is the expression of those lessons that – tragically for millions of people, given the
chances of getting stuck in unemployment – UK policymakers had to learn. We’re not about
to give up on the mandate. Success in anchoring inflation expectations in line with the target
will give us more scope over time to cushion the economy from the adverse shocks to growth
– which of course we would want to do when we can, consistent with medium-term stability.
What does, of course, shift as the months pass is our assessment, as nine individuals, of the
balance of risks to inflation, given changes in the economic environment. And quite a lot has
happened since our August forecast.
In the six weeks or so since the Committee’s August report was finalised, the signs of
weakening in the UK’s major trading partner, the euro area, have intensified. Growth appears
to be slowing in parts of Asia too. And in the US, the housing market has not yet obviously
stabilised, which is probably a precondition for broader recovery there. Domestically, the
output data have been on the soft side, moving into line with the battery of surveys and the
Bank’s regional Agents. The labour market also appears to have softened, with
unemployment rising and fewer vacancies advertised. It is perhaps not surprising that,
compared with recent slowdowns, there should be less hoarding of labour if firms expect the
adverse environment to persist for a while; and with tighter credit conditions, stretching

the export-oriented euro area would be adversely affected, and the UK with it. But, seriously, should the UK
cut the policy rate to head off the risk of a dent to output from a dollar collapse that hadn’t yet occurred? I don’t
think so.

2

BIS Review 112/2008

working capital, making it harder for firms to finance the retention of a
less-than-fully-occupied labour force. In the manufacturing sector, input and output price
inflation have edged down very slightly. In the service sector, the data are less timely, though
surveys have started to indicate some slowing in the pace of inflation. Commodity prices –
not only energy, but food too – have continued to fall, perhaps reflecting the effects on global
demand of the earlier price rises and the reduction of subsidies by a raft of emerging-market
countries. Equities have fallen around 3%. But sterling’s exchange rate has fallen – by
around 4% since the MPC’s August meeting; and by about 15% since the beginning of 2007,
so that, in sterling terms, the fall in oil prices has been less pronounced over the past month
or so.
On balance, those developments mostly comprise downside news, since the August Inflation
Report, to the outlook for demand and for inflation. But the recent depreciation of the
exchange rate has to be offset against that. And headline inflation has reached 4.4%. It will
probably rise further. The Committee can and will ensure that this is a temporary state of
affairs. But, for the moment, inflation expectations do continue to flash an amber light.
Meanwhile, credit has remained tight, and underlying money growth has decelerated,
implying that monetary conditions may be leaning against those incipient inflationary
pressures.
At the end of the last year – some months’ after the onset of the market turmoil – I set out
some of the thinking that guided my interpretation of the monetary data and how it related to
my policy decisions. 3 I stressed that “we must try to avoid a vicious circle in which tighter
liquidity conditions, lower asset values, impaired capital resources, reduced credit supply,
and slower aggregate demand feed back on each other”. A vicious circle between the world
financial system and global economy has so far probably been kept at bay; global growth has
slowed not collapsed. But there is no denying an adverse feedback loop between tightening
credit conditions, the macro slowdown, and the perception that that will in time impair banks’
asset portfolios. So it seems timely to revisit some of the issues of “money and credit”.
The Taylor-rule framework for thinking about policy
It is well over a decade since John Taylor set out what has become part of the current
orthodoxy of monetary economics. His rule looks something like this:
*

*

*

i = Π +r + a(Π – Π ) +b(y -y )
t
t
t
t t
t
t
This is, at its roots, a Wicksellian view of the world. 4 By fixing the short-run nominal rate, the
central bank can, given stickiness in prices over the short run, shift the short real interest rate
– both in absolute terms and, more particularly, relative to the short-run real rate that would
equilibriate demand and supply. 5 So that gap between the short real rate and its “equilibrium”
can be thought of as representing the stance of monetary policy, which should be chosen by
the central bank in the light of the extent to which inflation deviates from target, and to which
aggregate demand deviates from the supply capacity of the economy. Implicit in this rule is

3

See Tucker, PMWT (2008) “ Money and credit: banking and the macroeconomy”, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, 2008 Q1 pp 96-106.

4

See Wicksell, K, 1898, “Interest rates and Prices”.

5

Typically, policymakers think about that in terms of the “output gap”, reflecting firms’ capacity utilisation and
slack/pressure in the labour market. By contrast, in the academic literature – notably Michael Woodford’s
Interest and Prices – the benchmark is to set monetary policy in order to offset the frictions in the economy, so
as to obtain the conditions that would prevail if prices, wages etc were fully flexible. Policymakers and
academics need to resolve how big the gap is between those two approaches.

BIS Review 112/2008

3

that the textbook policymaker knows how the degree of slack in the real economy acts on
future inflation (or the slope of the Phillips curve).
The two forces sweeping through the world economy test the way policymakers typically
apply various elements of this set up in more routine circumstances.
For example, how do the commodity price rises and, separately, the credit crunch affect the
“equilibrium” short-term real rate? Is the actual short real rate still an adequate proxy
measure of monetary conditions? Is the “normal” relationship between economic slack and
future inflation intact?
The cost shocks, and monetary conditions
Although they have fallen by nearly $50 since the peak reached in July, oil prices are still up
more than 200% since the middle of 2003; and, indeed, around 3% since the beginning of
this year. As oil is a key input to production, this acts like a negative supply shock for the
Western economies: it costs firms more to produce the same level of output than before the
run up in oil prices. And, like a tax, it acts to redistribute spending power from energy
consumers to energy producers. In those circumstances, real-take home pay has to grow
more slowly for a while in order to avoid the capital stock shrinking as firms sought to
maintain the internationally-determined required rate of return. The role of monetary policy is
to facilitate that process, recognising the potential redundancy of some capital resources
given higher energy prices, and the upward pressure on real interest rates as households
seek to borrow to tide them over the tough times.
In other words, in the now standard set up, taking the cost shock on its own, the equilibrating
short-term real rate (r star) has risen and the economy’s potential supply (y star) has
probably fallen. So, ignoring other developments, policy would have to be tighter than
otherwise, even if the direct effects of the cost rise on the price level were accommodated.
But, of course, other things have been going on, and it is the net effect for our policy rate that
matters. And that involves making a judgment about the tightness of credit conditions.
The credit shock and monetary conditions
In conducting policy, commentators usually take the short-run nominal interest rate, Bank
Rate, as a summary measure of monetary conditions. If Bank Rate is increased, monetary
conditions are being tightened; and conditions are being loosened if Bank Rate is cut. There
are a few important simplifying assumptions being made here – assumptions whose validity
in current circumstances is doubtful.
In the first place, that view of the world implicitly assumes that the equilibrium real rate is
stable over time, whereas in fact it will move about. 6 Sometimes the central bank will need to
change its policy rate simply in order to maintain unchanged monetary conditions (as proxied
in the literature by r minus r star). In the same vein, if near-term inflation expectations rise or
fall, our nominal policy rate may need to change just to leave the actual short real rate
unchanged. In other words, we can fix only one thing – the short nominal rate – but what any
particular level of Bank Rate means for monetary conditions will depend on short-run inflation
expectations and on the equilibrium real rate needed to balance the economy. Both will likely
have changed materially in the face of the cost and credit shocks.
What our Bank Rate will mean for monetary conditions will depend on how it relates to the
panoply of other interest rates on financial contracts. In fully efficient markets, the risk-free

6

4

See Neiss, K and Nelson, E (2001) “The real interest rate as an inflation indicator”, Bank of England Working
Paper No 130.

BIS Review 112/2008

rate is a fully satisfactory summary statistic; other rates fall into line through arbitrage, with
differences reflecting risk premia. More practically, it can typically be assumed that the rates
charged on private sector loans are maintained at fairly stable spreads relative to the riskfree yield curve (ie given the expected path of the policy rate). And, related to that, it can also
typically be assumed that the degree of credit rationing in the economy is broadly constant
over time. Obviously, neither of those things is true at present.
The most unusual, and stretched, circumstances lie within the global financial system itself.
The premium on unsecured interbank lending has risen (Chart 1); and growth of such lending
has slowed. This reflects a desire to hoard liquidity in a hazardous environment; and
heightened aversion to taking on unsecured credit exposures for term maturities. Banks are,
in consequence, deleveraging 7 their balance sheets. Broadly, they can do so in two ways –
raise extra capital, or shrink (the pace of growth in) their balance sheets. Both have been
underway. The balance sheet shrinkage is reducing the supply of credit to households and
firms. But there is differentiation across the banking industry, according to size and strength.
In that environment, spreads on corporate bonds are higher. Many corporate and household
lending rates have been affected by the rise in Libor relative to risk-free rates. And retail
rates – for both loans, and some deposits – have risen relative to the relevant risk-free rate.
Effective rates on some types of lending are not much changed since last summer, but we
have cut Bank Rate by 75bp and the risk-free curve has shifted down (Chart 2).
All this is true in the US too, probably more so. That has led John Taylor himself to suggest 8
that, to maintain an unchanged policy stance, the policy rate should be reduced by the extent
of the widening in spreads. In fact, as I am sure Taylor recognises, it is nowhere near so
straightforward – if for no other reason than that, for the real economy, the most severe
feature of the credit shock is the rising incidence of quantity rationing. 9
There appears to be some discrimination between lower-risk and higher-risk borrowers in the
household sector. Rates on fixed-rate mortgages have recently been cut for lower loan-tovalue borrowers. We have added a question to our current Credit Condition Survey, due out
later this month, to gauge conditions in that part of the market. Plainly, conditions have
tightened a lot for riskier borrowers – households and firms. That means we need to look at
quantity data as well as at the price of credit. For companies, money growth has fallen very
sharply. Lending held up for a while, but possibly in part because firms were drawing on
committed lines of credit while they were still available on pre-turmoil terms. The Credit
Conditions Survey has signalled a clear tightening (Chart 3).
To translate this back into a Taylor-rule world, we would need to know the so-called “shadow
prices”. Of course we don’t know those unobservable prices. But we can, perhaps, get a
broadbrush handle on the materiality of the tightening by using estimated equations for credit
(and money) demand, holding all other influences constant. 10 There is just huge uncertainty

7

See Tucker, PMWT (2008), “The credit crisis: lessons from a protracted peacetime”, remarks given at the
Chatham House conference on “The New Financial Frontiers”. These remarks are also forthcoming in the
2008 Q3 edition of the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin.

8

See Taylor, JB., (2008) “Monetary Policy and the State of the Economy”, testimony before the Committee on
Financial Services, US House of Representatives, February and Mculley, P and Touli, R (2008) “Chasing the
Neutral Rate Down: Financial Conditions, Monetary Policy, and the Taylor Rule”, Global Central Bank Focus,
PIMCO.

9

Another reason reflected in the Curdia and Woodford (2008) paper is the fact that borrowers and savers have
different propensities to consume. Consequently a change in spreads will affect the “average rate” faced by
borrowers and savers in a different way from a change in the policy rate.

10

Based, for example, on Brigden, A and Mizen, P (1999) “ Money, credit and investment in the UK corporate
sector”, Bank of England Working Paper number 100.

BIS Review 112/2008

5

about such estimates but, for what it’s worth, they indicate a material tightening from this
source.
Alternatively, that can be thought of as being equivalent to a fall in the real risk-free rate of
interest that would equilibriate supply and demand. 11 Taken on its own, this rather leans
against the proposition, advanced by a number of commentators, that monetary conditions
are loose on the grounds that deducting CPI inflation of between 4 and 5% from a Bank Rate
of 5% leaves a “real rate” close to zero. First, as I have been arguing, it is vital to take into
account the possibility that the real rate warranted in the current conjuncture has fallen.
Second, headline CPI might not be the best deflator for calculating the relevant real rate of
interest. CPI may not necessarily be the price – the “own real rate” – relevant for individual
households’ and businesses’ spending decisions. 12 For example, firms’ investment might be
more dependent on the price of capital goods. Despite the pickup in oil prices, the pace of
inflation for capital goods has been much lower than for CPI. So that might suggest a
correspondingly higher real rate for businesses than one based on CPI (Chart 4). A similar
question could be posed about the real rate facing households, given that the CPI currently
excludes the costs of owner occupation.
So one can safely conclude that it is not all straightforward at present to calibrate monetary
conditions.
For researchers, that underlines the importance of renewing work directed at gauging
monetary conditions. A recent paper by Michael Woodford 13 concluded that information from
money and credit quantities could not add anything to spreads; and, what is more, that they
were not as useful as spreads because the quantity effects of a tightening become apparent
only with lags. The set up in Woodford’s paper does not, however, involve quantity rationing.
When such rationing occurs, data on the quantity of lending and money may be more useful,
even with a lag, than the shadow prices that cannot be observed! Of course, I absolutely do
not want a reversion to oversimplified Monetary Conditions Indices, which set a trap for
policymakers by ignoring the nature of the shocks that shift credit supply and other financial
variables. But we do need to have a better quantitive understanding of how the equilibrium
real rate (r star) shifts with shocks to the financial parts of the economy.
For UK policymakers, overall, the sharp slowing in corporate and household credit and
money growth signals that monetary conditions are quite tight. Tighter bank lending
conditions will make it harder for households to maintain their spending during this testing
period – when the rise in energy and food prices has squeezed disposable incomes; and
when the savings rate was already low. Similarly, with less easy access to credit, it will be
harder for firms to bridge to the expected recovery without cutting costs. On the whole, the
corporate sector probably entered this episode with stronger balance sheets, leveraged buyouts aside, than the household sector. But, as the months have passed, firms have been
registering a greater sensitivity to tighter financial conditions.
The lags between the incidence of the financial shock last summer and its impact on
spending in the economy have been fairly drawn out. It is striking that through the autumn
and perhaps even into the spring, a number of commentators thought this was essentially a
problem for Wall Street not Main Street. We need more research to help understand those
lags, and whether the credit shock has been more potent for its coinciding with the climb in
commodity prices.

11

David Miles has recently made a broadly similar point in “The cost of bank debt: rethinking the neutral rate”.

12

I owe this point to Mervyn King.

13

See Curdia V, and Woodford and M (2008), “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy”, a paper discussed
at the BIS Annual Conference in June 2008.

6

BIS Review 112/2008

That assessment has informed my view that slack will accumulate, leaning against – but not
eliminating – the current upside risks to inflation. Indeed, the best gauge of our view of
monetary and credit conditions is to be found in our periodic forecasts for growth and
inflation.
Nominal trends
A hazard, given the current paradigm in monetary economics, is that its all too easy for
policymakers to fall into the habit of never mentioning anything nominal – apart from inflation
expectations.
One of the key challenges for monetary researchers is, accordingly, to discover more about
what determines inflation expectations. Meanwhile, whatever is incorporated into forecasting
models, policymakers cannot sensibly just take it for granted that expectations are anchored,
so that inflation will painlessly come back into line with the target whenever it is driven away
by temporary cost shocks. What that means right now is that arresting the upside risk to
inflation cannot rely entirely on real-economy interactions.
So what diagnostics have we got on nominal trends, right now?
On the whole, they are not signalling an imminent resurgence in inflationary psychology.
Nominal demand growth has slowed quite sharply (Chart 5). Adjusting for various misleading
technicals, 14 broad money has decelerated sharply (Chart 6). The rate of growth of so-called
Divisia money, a measure of transactions balances, has similarly fallen sharply. And in the
labour market, nominal earnings growth has recently been below 3.5%, although the annual
wage round lies ahead. Sterling’s exchange rate has fallen, however. That might be
consistent with the foreign exchange markets expecting a nominal shock in the future. But
there are other possible explanations, notably that a risk premium may have become
incorporated to compensate for uncertainty in the outlook.
Had there been a shift in the market’s inflation expectations, the obvious place for that to
show up would be in the yields on nominal government bonds. For medium-term maturities,
so-called “breakeven inflation rates” – derived from the difference between the yields on
conventional and inflation-indexed gilts – have stabilised over the past few months. Given the
frictions that many believe distort indexed-linked yields, 15 I also like to look directly at nominal
forward rates. The underlying thought is that, relative to fluctuations in bond yields brought
about by past shifts in inflation regimes, longer-term risk-free real rates may not move around
a great deal, so that any systematic inflationary impulse would be quite likely to show up in
nominal yields. Consistent with that, following the UK’s disinflation in the early-1990s,
medium-term nominal forward rates fell by around 400bp. Since the new monetary regime
became established in the late 1990s, they have been more or less stable, and currently
remain within the range prevailing over the past decade or so.
Surveys of household inflation expectations tell a broadly consistent story. For near-term
horizons, they have picked up sharply. What limited information we have on the public’s

14

Broad money (M4) can be adjusted using Bank estimates of banks' intragroup business with other financial
corporations, as well as banks' repo activity with LCH.Clearnet's RepoClear service. Such estimates are
based on anecdotal information provided by a small sample of banks. Work is under way within the Bank to
improve the basis of these estimates, see Burgess, S and Janssen, N (2007), “Proposals to modify the
measurement of broad money in the United Kingdom: a user consultation”, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, vol. 47, no. 3, pages 402-14.

15

Of course, if true risk-free rates fall then, other things being equal, nominal forward rates would fall too, and so
would not, on their own, be a good indicator of inflation expectations. Given the bulge in Asian savings, there
are reasons to think that long real rates might have fallen. But this is much less pronounced in US$ TIP yields
than in UK indexed-gilt yields, and so I incline to the view that the gilt-market “breakeven” rates are somewhat
distorted.

BIS Review 112/2008

7

medium-term expectations suggests that the expectations might have been more contained,
and might more recently have started to edge down a bit. But it is hard to know how much
weight to place on that.
But if the upside risks to medium-term inflation are not yet firmly embedded in expectations
and so are not evident across the nominal indicators, we certainly cannot conclude that the
risk has passed.
Headline inflation outturns remain elevated, and could top 5% – well above the 2% target –
for a number of months. Not only have goods prices accelerated, reflecting the direct impact
of food and energy prices, but services inflation has risen too (Chart 7). As a diagnostic of
the underlying upside risks, ignoring the direct effect of past increases in food and energy
prices, inflation has reached around 2%. Sterling’s recent depreciation will give a further
impulse to import prices; and so, other things being equal, may stretch out the period of
uncomfortably high inflation, endangering inflation expectations.
Moreover, there remains a risk of continuing inflation impulses from the persistence of
imbalances in the global economy.
Global inflation, global imbalances and the international monetary regime
The rate of nominal expansion in much of the emerging market world has remained brisk.
From our point of view, up until recently that seemed to add to the upward impetus to
commodity prices, exacerbating the upward pressure on our firms’ costs.
Of course, part of the rise in commodity prices over the past few years is explained by a
profound structural shift as the world economy is joined by large, rapidly developing
economies which are increasingly energy intensive. In addition, nominal demand has
probably played a role recently. Some EMEs have exchange rates that are fixed, more or
less, to the US dollar, and so have been importing a monetary easing, which they hardly
needed, as the FOMC cut the Fed funds rate to address domestic US circumstances. In
other countries, there has also been less than complete sterilisation of the monetary effects
of exchange rate intervention. Absent offsetting policy action, eventually the nominal
expansion permitted will be dissipated in rising inflation and so an appreciation in real
exchange rates. For a given path of nominal demand, that would tend to reduce the pressure
of demand on global commodity prices, as many of the largest EME economies are,
basically, commodity importers themselves. But persistent elevated inflation in the EMEs
would also increase the nominal price of some of our imports, unless an adjustment in
nominal exchange rates were permitted. In fact, over recent months there have been some
steps towards taking domestic monetary action across a number of emerging market
economies. But there is a risk that higher EME inflation will persist if, left unchecked, it
becomes embedded in inflation expectations.
With inflation also elevated across the major industrialised economies, this underlines the
risk to global inflation from imbalances in global supply and demand. Individual countries can
suffer exogenous shocks to inflation from commodity prices, but that is essentially a relative
price shift, to which the world economy has to adjust. By contrast, a persistent rise in
inflationary pressures cannot be exogenous for all countries collectively. In that respect, the
international monetary regime, and the global imbalances it has sustained, continues to pose
risks to the outlook for our economy.
Indeed, in terms of where we find ourselves, we must take care not to put the cost shock and
the credit shock in completely separate boxes. They both owe something to global
imbalances. Early commentators on the developing international monetary system,

8

BIS Review 112/2008

combining a mixture of floating and fixed-rate exchange rates (so-called Bretton Woods II), 16
were inclined to the view that current account imbalances would prove sustainable –
essentially because Asia would, they assumed, continue to finance the USA’s savings deficit.
But, as has become apparent over time, that seemed to rely on the invisible hand smoothing
over the counterpart imbalances within some net debtor economies, notably the USA; or,
more crudely, of it making no difference that, in aggregate, American households had
effectively given up saving.
Given the now widely acknowledged ex ante imbalance a few years ago between global
investment and Asian-fuelled global saving, this was associated with a compression of longterm risk-free rates and an associated rise in asset prices. And given frictions elsewhere in
the system, including the US GSE’s guarantees reducing the headline returns on primemortgage securitisations, that contributed to compression in risk premia. And that, I fear,
fuelled a “search for yield” in which investors, having enjoyed the extraordinary windfall gains
that accompany rising asset prices, extrapolated forward their elevated ex post returns into
ex ante requirements (Diagram A). 17 (Such extrapolation amounts to a bubble, but via the
channel of a requirement or target rather than, directly, a simple expectation.) There’s only
one way to deliver on such requirements in those conditions: take more risk and hope no one
prices for it. Leverage and maturity transformation were the order of the day. Macro met
finance, and the results were unhappy – a theme I shall return to later.
For too long without success, monetary policymakers and international institutions called for
resolution of the global imbalances. Perhaps with hindsight, the industrialised economies
should have been clearer about their own course in a second-best world in which some
important exchange rates have remained semi-fixed for longer than believed ideal. The
second-best probably involved measures to generate more domestic saving; may have
invited tolerance for temporarily lower inflation; and perhaps tighter regulation of liquidity
provision by the commercial banking system. But whatever the hindsight, there remains a
pressing need to evaluate now the continuing risks from the pattern of global current account
positions and capital flows.
For researchers, this unfinished episode in global economic history underlines the
significance of international monetary economics, but perhaps also a need to integrate it not
only with the theory of asset pricing but also with a rich appreciation of credit creation and
risk.
Risk premia, money, default and crises
Indeed, an implicit theme running through various threads in my remarks this morning, which
I shall now try to pull together, is the need for further progress in integrating macroeconomics
and finance – applied as well as theory. I will give a few reasons why.
As well as compensating for expected default, expected inflation and so on, yields on assets
embody risk premia to compensate for uncertainty in future returns. In the modern literature,
these risk premia are taken to be determined by how useful a financial asset is in helping
households to smooth the path of their consumption. Assets that deliver low returns during
bad times don’t contribute much to helping households sustain consumption, and so carry a
higher risk premium. So risk premia might vary with the volatility of the asset return; the
volatility of consumption; and with the correlation between asset returns and consumption.

16

See Dooley, M.P, Folkerts-Landau, D and Garber, P (2003), “An essay on the revised Bretton Woods
System”, NBER Working Paper 9971. “System” is not quite the right word, because it is not the product of
collective international thought and planning.

17

See Tucker, PMWT (2006) “Uncertainty, the implementation of monetary policy and the management of risk”,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2006 Q2 pp 202-211.

BIS Review 112/2008

9

Like other economic variables, such premia may change as their underlying determinants
change, and given the nature of the “shocks” affecting the macroeconomy. All that is familiar,
fairly orthodox stuff these days. Indeed, an extraordinary amount of work at the
macro/financial frontier has been going on over recent years. But as John Cochrane has
commented, “work has barely begun”. 18 From a policymakers’ perspective, that does seem to
be the case.
First, while papers are still produced in the tradition that “macroeconomists can safely go on
ignoring finance”, we – policymakers – are having to make sense of a macro environment in
which the supply of credit has been interrupted by problems sourced in part to swings in risk
premia, and quite possibly swings in risk aversion. Models incorporating risk premia – and,
indeed, embracing bubbles – might just help us with that.
But it is striking that, so far, the progress in finance hardly features in the macro models used
around the world for forecasting. Indeed, such models barely recognise the existence of
financial instruments beyond risk-free bonds and equities. 19 In modern DSGE models, asset
prices (and so risk premia) merely reflect economic developments; they are not “actors” in
any way. Even if we were to accept that risk premia are not “actors”, for policymakers they
might serve as useful diagnostics of what is going on in the economy – of the nature of the
underlying shocks – given that asset price changes are typically apparent some time before
the associated real economy adjustments. On that view, we need research that will help us
read the “risk premia” tea leaves. For example, an increase in premia that could be traced to
an increase in the correlation between consumption and investment returns, might point to a
prospective increase in households’ precautionary saving. But it’s less obvious, at least to
me, what macroeconomic developments I should expect if risk premia rose due to an
“exogenous” rise, say due to reduced market making, in the volatility of asset prices. We also
need to be able to make sense of shifts in relative risk premia on different asset classes. We
need models that can say something useful about the compression, and then widening, in
credit and liquidity risk premia that in some ways define the current financial turmoil. We
need to know whether or not those shifts reflect changes in fundamentals, or unwarranted
“exuberance” or “fear” in the markets; and whether or not they have implications for demand
and supply conditions in the real economy.
Second, very little has been said about how, or whether, the supply of money (or monetary
policy) may affect risk premia. Years ago Brunner and Meltzer set out a view 20 of how shocks
to the supply of base money were transmitted to the economy through effects on asset prices
over and above the impact on the risk-free discount rate, but through liquidity (and maybe
other risk) premia. More recently, some policymakers, 21 have conjectured that swings in the
supply of broad money (via bank lending) can be associated with shifts in risk premia too.
The thought is that in a world in which different assets are not perfect substitutes for each
other, whether money is over or under-supplied can affect the relative value of other financial
assets. If the channel is thought to work through broad money, as transactions balances, 22
then of course it is the supply of bank lending that matters. Essentially, when “liquidity” is
plentiful, it may be undervalued. That may build a bridge to the literature on how the supply

18

See Cochrane, J, “Financial Markets and the Real Economy.

19

See Tucker, PMWT “Reflections on Operating an Inflation Target”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2006
Q2 pp 212-224.

20

See Tucker, PMWT (2007) “A perspective on recent monetary and financial system developments” Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin 2007 Q2 pp 310-316.

21

Including the current G of the BofE and myself; see King, M (2002) “No money, no inflation – the role of
money in the economy” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2002 Q2 pp 162-177.

22

See Thornton, D. L, (2008) “Monetary policy: Why monetary matters and interest rates don’t”, Federal
Reserve Bank of St Louis Working paper 2008-011.

10

BIS Review 112/2008

of credit from the banking sector can influence the liquidity of asset markets. 23 This echoes
my earlier discussion of the potential utility, as indicators, of the data on money and credit
quantities when the degree of credit rationing shifts. We’d do better at making sense of those
issues if we had a better understanding of the determinants and macro-significance of risk
premia in the first place.
Extending that point, the literature may too easily dismiss the possible effects on prices of the
demand and supply of financial assets more generally. But we need testable theories as to
why, and the circumstances in which, they might matter.
Finally, looking beyond the ex ante compensation for risk, we also need to have better
models for exploring what can happen – in the financial system and in the macroeconomy –
when nasty forms of risk do actually crystallise. Default comes to mind. 24 Bank default is a
special case, given the special role of banks in a monetary economy. And, guess what?
Banks don’t really feature in modern macro models. Of course, incorporating those features
of the real world is incredibly hard, involving heterogeneous agents, incomplete contracts
and markets, and uncertainty.
Uncertainty needs to be underlined. It isn’t clear whether existing models could explain the
swings we have been experiencing in some asset prices. Is that something to do with market
participants having become radically uncertain about the nature of the underlying
distributions? And do asset prices become actors in those circumstances?
Over many decades now, 25 elegant models have been developed for studying financial
market distress in the abstract – whether affecting banks or asset markets. This, of course,
involves strategic interaction amongst agents. We have other models in which the probability
of such distress may be related to various characteristics of banks, such as whether they are
comfortably within thresholds for capital adequacy – the argument being that as they get
closer to the threshold, depositors become less confident about the stability of each other’s
behaviour. 26 And we have models in which bank capital is affected by macroeconomic
developments; and models in which, through financial accelerator-like mechanisms, impaired
bank capital affects the supply of credit, 27 and so potentially macroeconomic variables. But
we don’t yet have models in which the determinants of the probability of banking system
distress are influenced by the macro environment; and in which such distress can, really,
occur and affect the macro environment. That seems to call for somehow embedding gametheoretic strategic interactions within dynamic macro models. 28

23

See Allen, F, and Gale, D, (2007) “Understanding Financial Crises”, Oxford University Press.

24

Commenting on a recent paper by Michael Woodford, Charles Goodhart (pointed out that the model
incorporated credit risk premia but not default. Everyone is hoping that Woodford picks up the challenge. (See
Goodhard, C, comments on “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy” by Curdia and Woodford (2008).
These were given at the 7th BIS Annual Conference.

25

See Diamond DW, Dybvig PH, (1983) “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity” Journal of Political
Economy 91, pp401-19.

26

See Rochet, J-C and Vives, X (2004), “Coordination failures and the lender of last resort: was Bagehot right
after all?”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 2(6), pages 1116-47

27

See Adrian, T and Shin, HS (2008) “Liquidity and leverage”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports
No 328, and Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). "The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1C, Handbooks in
Economics, vol. 15. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1341-93.

28

I stress dynamic macro models because we do already have Arrow-Debreu type general equilibrium models in
which default can occur; eg Tsomocos DP, Jackson P,and Catarineu-Rabell, E (2003), “Procyclicality and the
new Basel Accord – bank’s choice of loan rating system”, Bank of England Working Paper 181, and Dubey, P,
Geanakoplos, J and Shubik, M (2000) “Default in a general equilibrium model with incomplete markets”,
Cowles Foundation DP 1247, Yale University. The difficulty with such models for a macro policymaker is that

BIS Review 112/2008

11

Overall, truly incorporating risk into our thinking has to be one of the last great frontiers for
applied macroeconomics. For central banks, that would help to meet the challenge of
integrating our monetary policy and financial stability missions, which cannot be separated in
a monetary economy.
Summary and conclusions
This morning I have offered some thoughts on what one policymaker would find useful from
future research in applied monetary economics:
•

the determination of fluctuations in inflation expectations

•

a revival of interest in money and credit quantities, especially when credit rationing
means that we cannot observe “shadow prices” and so cannot live entirely in the
modern textbook world of prices

•

and if, as I believe we should, we are going to continue to think largely in terms of
prices, then we need more work on the determination of risk premia on a range of
financial assets, and the information they can give us on the real economy,
integrating this into our workhorse macro forecasting models

•

empirical work on the lags with which shocks to the financial system feed through to
the real economy, and on the conditions for the impact to matter

•

work designed to help quantify how different shocks to supply and demand affect
the equilibrium short-term real interest rate

•

greater interest in the international monetary regime, and on how countries may be
able to shield themselves during a period of unsustainable imbalances without
succumbing to “begar thy neighbour” policies; and

•

the development of dynamic macro models in which really bad things, such as
defaults, bank distress and asset price collapses, can happen and can have
macroeconomic effects.

That is quite a shopping list. The official sector, internationally, could, in my view, probably
help – both researchers and itself – by producing data on financial flows and stocks as rich
as the real economy data we collect. I have in mind things like the Federal Reserve’s “Flow
of Funds” statistics. As well as being of immediate practical use, over time there would be
benefits from the richer empirical research it would allow your community to conduct. The
underlying thought is that, until we know more about risk premia, we should not give up
tracking quantities. Doing so in the future might aid comprehension of the risks in the
financial system.
The challenge for policymakers is no smaller than that for researchers. We must tackle the
task at hand with the tools we have. There are substantial risks to inflation in both directions
over the medium term. But at present, the most likely prospect remains that, as the global
economy slows, accumulating slack in the economy will head off the upside risks to inflation.
That strategy relies not only on real-economy interactions, but crucially on the credibility of
the target and the Committee. Above all else, therefore, we must be clear about our
mandate: to deliver stable inflation, at 2%, over the medium term.

they tell the end of the story, when all relative prices have been determined, whereas we want to enrich our
grasp of the narrative so that we can influence the end of the story.

12

BIS Review 112/2008

Chart 1: Premium on unsecured interbank
lending (Libor-OIS)

Chart 2: Selective effective rates and Bank
rate

Basis points
140
1 month

3 month

6 month

Per cent
9.0

PNFC overdraft rate

120

8.0

100

7.0

80

6.0
5.0

60
Bank rate

40
20

3.0

Household mortgage rate

2.0

0

1.0

-20
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

0.0
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

Chart 3: Credit condition survey(a)- large
corporates

Chart 4: CPI and the capital goods deflator

Net percentage balances(b)

Cheaper
credit

Percentage changes on a year earlier
10

80
Spreads

Loan
covenants

4.0

8

60

6

40
20

CPI

0

4
2

-20

0

-40

-2

-60
Dearer credit

-80

Capital goods

-100
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
2008
2007
2008
2007

-4
-6

1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007

(a) The blue bars show responses over the past three months. The
red diamonds show expectations over the next three months.
Expectations balances have been moved forward one quarter so that
they can be compared with the actual outturns in the following
quarter.
(b) A positive balance indicates that spreads have become narrower,
such that it is cheaper to borrow, or that the terms and conditions on
which credit is provided have become looser.

BIS Review 112/2008

13

Chart 6: Divisia money(a)

Chart 5: Nominal demand
Percentage change on a year earlier

3mth/Quarterly annualised rate
20

14
12

15

10
10

8
6

5

4
0

2
0

-5
1977

1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006

1983

1989

1995

2001

2007

(a) Quarterly data prior to 2000, monthly data since then.

Chart 7: CPI inflation
Percentage changes on a year earlier

6
5

Services

4
3
2

CPI

1
0
-1

Goods

-2
-3

1997

1999

14

2001

2003

2005

2007

BIS Review 112/2008

Diagram A: Stylised effect on equity returns of a fall in risk premia
One-period ex-post equity returns
Time T

Time T+x
Premium falls by Y% each
period

Preshock
steady
state
returns

Post
shock
steady
state
returns

time

BIS Review 112/2008

15

John Gieve: The credit crunch and the UK economy
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Family Office
Leadership Summit, London, 22 September 2008.
*

*

*

Introduction
In recent days we have seen extraordinary developments in US financial markets. At the
start of last week we saw the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the merger of Merrill Lynch
and Bank of America; by Friday the US Treasury had rescued AIG, issued a guarantee of
Money Market Funds and an outline plan for a Resolution Trust that is now in Congress. And
this morning the Federal Reserve announced that Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley
would become regulated bank holding companies.
But I want today to concentrate on the broader economic impact of the crisis in credit
markets, which began over a year ago with the downturn in the US sub-prime housing
market. While the epicentre has remained in the US, it has already had a major impact on
the structure of our banking sector. Northern Rock was among the first casualties. And this
year we are seeing a significant consolidation within the UK banking sector, with Santander
purchasing Alliance & Leicester, Nationwide absorbing two smaller building societies, and
most recently the merger of HBOS and Lloyds TSB.
The turmoil has also affected all of the Bank’s work; from the setting of interest rates, to the
scale and structure of our market operations, and to our joint work with the FSA and
Treasury to deal with institutions under stress and to help design an effective international
response to the crisis.
For example, like other central banks, we have adapted our money market operations to
provide the liquidity the banking system as a whole has required. First, we have allowed
banks to increase their reserve balances at the Bank, increasing the size of our overall
provision of central bank money; second, within that larger total, we have shifted the balance
towards longer-term lending as the terms of market finance have shortened; third, we have
widened the collateral we accept for longer-term repos. And in April, we introduced a special
scheme to provide banks with up to three years’ finance for legacy assets which have
become illiquid.
Last week we offered extra sterling liquidity through our usual Open Market Operations and
provided US dollar liquidity as part of co-ordinated action with the Federal Reserve, ECB,
Bank of Japan and Swiss National Bank. We also extended the window in which banks can
swap their legacy assets under the Special Liquidity Scheme until January next year. Even
once the window closes, the Scheme’s asset swap will provide liquidity for a period of up to
three years, something many people have not fully appreciated.
Events are still moving quickly, so I hope you will understand why I am not going to attempt a
live commentary on events. I hope that the massive and far-reaching measures the US
Government has now announced will restore greater calm and confidence in their banking
system. Stabilisation of US markets and banks should have a beneficial knock-on effect on
wider international markets too. But we will continue to monitor the situation closely, in
consultation with our counterparts in the US and elsewhere, in order to judge whether any
further measures are needed.
Inflation outlook
This morning I want to take a wider perspective and discuss how the credit crunch is
affecting the wider UK economy and draw some medium-term lessons for economic policy.

BIS Review 114/2008

1

And the first point to make is that the turmoil in financial markets has not been the only shock
to our economy in the last 12 months. In any other week more attention would have been
given to the fact that for the second successive quarter the Governor had to write an open
letter to the Chancellor on behalf of the Monetary Policy Committee to explain why inflation
was more than a percentage point away from the target of 2%. In fact inflation has risen from
2.1% in December to 4.7% in August and it seems set to peak above 5% soon.
The immediate driver of that increase has been the international commodity cycle (Chart 1).
The rapid growth across most large emerging market economies (EMEs) in particular has
fuelled global demand for raw materials, which in the short term are in relatively fixed supply,
pulling their prices upwards. In August, oil prices were up 60% higher than a year earlier,
wholesale gas prices were up 90%, and food prices 40%.
These sharp increases in costs have fed into food and petrol prices and passed along the
supply chain, driving up the prices of other goods including in particular household gas and
electricity bills (Chart 2). But so long as the prices of wholesale energy and foodstuffs on
global markets stabilise at their new higher levels, their direct impact on inflation should wash
out after a year. In other words, by late 2009 these items would not be making any
contribution to the rate of consumer price inflation: whereas, at present, they are contributing
almost 3 percentage points.
Moreover there are some signs that the commodity cycle may have turned down. Since the
peak in July, the price of food has fallen by 10% and the price of crude oil has fallen by over
a quarter, and that is consistent with other indicators that point to a slowing in growth in both
emerging and advanced economies.
That good news on commodity prices has been offset somewhat in the UK by a falling
exchange rate. Sterling has been trading at around 1.8 against the US dollar – a year ago it
was 2.0. But the same arithmetic applies: such price level shocks need have no long-term
impact on the inflation rate.
In the medium term the real upside risks to inflation lie at home – in whether we see “second
round” rises in wages and prices in the domestic economy. It is to counter those pressures
that the MPC have judged it necessary over the last year for growth to slow and create a
margin of spare capacity in our economy. That makes it more difficult for companies to raise
prices and puts more pressure on them to restrain their costs.
It also re-emphasises our determination to get inflation back to the 2% target and thus
influences the expectations of financial markets, price setters, wage negotiators and
households generally. And expectations themselves have an important impact on inflation.
Broadly, the higher households’ expect inflation to be, the less they are likely to save today.
Inflation expectations also shape workers’ wage demands as they try to protect their
standard of living. And companies’ expectations will shape the prices they set as well as their
willingness to concede cost increases.
We know from the inflations of the 70s, 80s, and early 90s that raising interest rates will in
time bring inflation down, even when expectations of future inflation are high. But we also
know how painful that process is. It works through the increased threat of bankruptcy and
unemployment. That forces a change in peoples’ behaviour and their hearts and minds and
expectations follow. Conversely, the more confident people are that inflation will fall back the
less we have to rely on slowing the economy to force them to hold prices and wages down.
That is why the risk of inflation expectations drifting up has been such a central concern of
the MPC over the last year. In my view it has been particularly important through recent
months, when each forecast has been higher than the one before and each inflation figure
has exceeded the earlier forecast, not to confuse the central message that we will set policy
to bring inflation back down to target.
We have seen households’ near-term expectations of inflation rise this year, but that was
inevitable given experience and our own forecasts (Chart 3). What matters more are

2

BIS Review 114/2008

expectations of inflation over the medium-term, and whether they are consistent with the
target, and here the surveys are less alarming: according to the YouGov/Citigroup survey,
those expectations have fallen back a little and a gap has opened up between people’s
perceptions of current inflation and their expectations of a year or more ahead.
We can use other economic data as a cross-check on what is happening to inflation
expectations. If households’ expectations had become detached, we should expect to see
households spending more, and saving less, and pushing for larger nominal wage increases.
If companies’ expectations had become detached, we should expect to see a broad-based
pickup in cost and price inflation. But consumer spending appears to be weak, nominal wage
growth remains relatively muted and once we strip out the impact of rising commodity prices,
output price inflation has been steady. To paraphrase Sherlock Holmes, if expectations have
become detached, it is curious that those dogs haven’t barked. So in my view the news on
that front has been encouraging.
The impact of the credit crunch
And of course, we have been balancing that upside risk to inflation from the commodity price
shock against a downside risk that the credit crisis would drive down activity too far and push
inflation below target in the medium term. And the news on that front remains worrying.
The headlines are about the drama on Wall Street but the failure or rescue of even big and
well known financial firms matters mainly because of their knock on impact on the wider
economy. The last year has brought home once again why central banks have to be
concerned with financial stability as well as monetary stability and inflation. For the biggest
risk to the financial sector is also the biggest downside risk to the economy: namely that
damage to bank balance sheets would lead to tighter credit conditions, lower asset prices,
lower consumption and investment and to a severe feedback loop into more losses for banks
and so on down a spiral.
That feedback is already working to some degree not just in the US but in the UK too. Our
investment banks have suffered losses in their trading books and a wider group of banks
have lost money on their treasury books because of the fall in the values of structured credit
of all sorts. At the same time they have found that some of their major sources of finance,
notably securitisation and medium term unsecured lending, have dried up and others,
notably shorter term lending in money markets, have become much more expensive
(Chart 4).
What is more, all these effects have lasted longer than expected and seem set to continue
for some time. Banks have responded by hoarding liquidity and trying to reduce their
leverage by raising new capital (not without difficulty in some cases) and by constraining the
growth of lending. One direct effect has been a marked tightening of credit conditions over
the past year (Chart 5), which seems still to be underway. That in turn is pushing down asset
prices and demand.
Our forecasts and our policy decisions have reflected our best assessment of the likely
impact of this feedback. We brought down interest rates earlier in the year to cushion the
impact of the change in bank behaviour. In effect we have relied on the credit squeeze in
large measure to produce the slowdown we consider necessary. But we are fully aware of
the risk that the squeeze on banks and the feedback to the economy could prove more
powerful than expected.
That risk does not just arise from the drama of the last week or two. We will continue to work
for the return of calmer financial markets. But we should not rely on that to reverse quickly
the broader macroeconomic slowdown that is underway. Indeed there are still risks to the
downside and I thought it might be useful to spell out how they feed through the economy
and therefore make plain what indicators I will be focusing on in the next few months.

BIS Review 114/2008

3

Any contraction in lending to the real economy can amplify the slowdown in demand (Chart
6). Increases in retail lending rates for those who can still get access to credit discourage
spending. Increases in credit rationing can have a more dramatic impact. If those households
and companies are unable to tap other sources of finance, then their spending will have to
fall back in line with income.
Spending on high cost durable goods – such as purchases of cars and white goods by
households and machines by companies – are likely to be particularly affected. And the
contraction in mortgage lending pushes down house prices, further eroding the value of the
collateral against which banks’ loans are secured.
Tighter credit conditions raise income gearing, forcing households and companies to devote
a larger share of their income to servicing debt. And as the impact of those tighter credit
conditions bite on the economy, income is likely to be squeezed and that at the same time as
real incomes are being affected by higher food and energy prices. The slowdown in demand
will fall disproportionately on certain industries, starting with the house-building sector and
related services and lead to falls in employment. Some households and companies are likely
to be driven over the default threshold.
Tighter credit conditions could also affect the potential output of the economy – reducing the
capacity of the economy to produce goods and services. The economy’s supply capacity
reflects not only the number of people who work and the number of machines at their
disposal, but also how productive our companies are at using that labour and capital to
produce output. And the innovations in new products and new processes which drive
productivity growth are financed in part by bank lending.
In short, the process of deleveraging that was designed to alleviate pressure on banks’
capital position can lead to an additional wave of credit losses, coupled with higher write-off
rates, given the lower level of property prices (Chart 7). And, welcome though the reforms of
Basel II and accounting rules are in many respects, they can accentuate the squeeze on
capital because the requirements are based on risk weights which rise when arrears are
increasing and collateral values are falling.
House prices and consumption
One important feedback is through the housing market which is continuing to weaken. The
number of loan approvals for house purchases is at a record low, the ratio of sales to stocks
is approaching the levels of the early 1990s, and prices are now down 12% on their peak of
late last year.
Of course falls in house prices tend to coincide with a slowdown in the wider economy
because they are affected by the same factors – notably falls in real income and
employment. But they can also feed back into activity. First they slow housing investment
and transaction flow which hits builders and related services like estate agents and
conveyancers. The purchases of white goods and furniture tend to go hand in hand with
transactions in the housing market. So the slowdown in the number of people moving home
is likely to impact on spending on those goods.
Falling house prices limit how much households and small businesses can borrow today and
that pulls down consumption and investment. Also by reducing their expectations of what
they will be able to borrow tomorrow either to compensate for a reduction in income or a
need to spend, some households and firms may increase their precautionary savings.
Finally, falling house prices redistribute wealth. Those who already own houses and expect
to trade down in future and realise a capital gain, are worse off. On the other side, those
hoping to trade up or who are not yet on the housing ladder are better off (although the
tighter constraints on lending may mean they have to save a bigger deposit to enter the
market). The former will tend to reduce their consumption; the latter will tend to do the

4

BIS Review 114/2008

opposite. In a perfect market these two effects might balance out. But given that some of the
beneficiaries of house price falls do not yet have independent incomes, and others have a
longer period ahead to consume their additional wealth, on balance I would expect the net
effect on consumption to be negative. More widely I would expect some impact from the end
of a wide perception that in housing you can have your cake and eat it – that the return on
your house as an investment will in time substantially offset the cost of housing as a service.
All these feedback channels are at work and economics is better at identifying their nature
than in forecasting their scale. There is no alternative there to reviewing all the indicators I
have mentioned month by month and then making an informed judgment.
Some policy lessons for the medium term
We identified the mispricing of risk, particularly in credit markets in our Financial Stability
Reports over the last two years. But the reckoning has been more severe and destabilising
than anyone anticipated. Risk premia had become compressed and leverage throughout the
financial markets had risen too high. The pendulum has now swung back with a vengeance.
As the FSR noted earlier this year, risk premia now appear to have overshot in some
markets and that is contributing to the slowdown in the real economy.
Could policymakers have taken earlier action to correct those imbalances? Of course we
took the decisions we did on the basis of the available data at the time. But with hindsight,
seen across the world as a whole, there was a case for somewhat tighter monetary policy to
prevent the demand for resources outstripping supply (although I would note that our interest
rates have been consistently higher in recent years than those elsewhere in the advanced
economies). The rise in oil and food prices has appeared as an external pressure on each
country on its own but it is not external to us all collectively. A particular problem here – that
has yet to be resolved – is the expansion of the dollar bloc. The emerging economies were
importing loose monetary policy, which scarcely seemed appropriate to their domestic
conditions.
However it is hard to believe that a somewhat tighter monetary policy would have been
guaranteed to head off the credit boom and subsequent crunch altogether. Put another way,
monetary policy is a blunt instrument. To prevent excesses in financial markets, we might
have had to generate an unnecessary slowdown in the real economy. I share the view
therefore that we have to look for new regulatory measures to complement interest rates.
There are a number of specific lessons on regulation which have already been identified. The
FSA, for example, is already strengthening its prudential supervision. And internationally, we
need to fill gaps in the current framework – for example on mortgage origination in the US,
increasing the capital requirements for some credit products and loan commitments, and
ensuring that investors and rating agencies assess new products more diligently. In the UK
we have also set out proposals to reform the legal framework for dealing with failing banks.
Through the Financial Stability Forum we also need to strengthened supervisory colleges
and cross-border crisis management arrangements.
One more general lesson is that we have to recognise the difference between what is good
risk management in a single company and what is good for the system as a whole. For a
company the ideal risk management system is one which enables them to take risks, reap
the rewards but get out first when the music stops. And the right capital and liquidity is one
which is just enough to see you through the subsequent downturn in asset prices and
transactions. But there is always someone at the end of the queue and it is impossible to be
sure who they will be. Moreover in a global market the problems of one institution are bound
to spread quickly to others along a complex web of interconnections in many markets. For
the authorities what matters is whether the losses to the slower players damage the system
as a whole. One lesson of recent events is that the capital and liquidity buffers need to be

BIS Review 114/2008

5

higher for everyone. The long decline in holdings of liquid assets (Chart 8) by banks for
example has to be reversed a bit and the increase in leverage likewise (Chart 9).
In the Financial Stability Forum, which is leading the international regulatory response to the
crisis, we are also looking at the scope for “macro prudential” instruments to dampen the
destabilising procyclicality in financial markets. To do this we need to do more than simply
raise the minimum levels of capital and liquidity that regulators, rating agencies, or the
markets require. We need to create reserves based on macroeconomic factors, which can be
drawn down as the cycle turns down and have to be replenished on the upswing when profits
are high. The system of dynamic provisioning in Spain seems to work effectively in that
respect and may well offer a guide for the way forward.
Conclusion
To conclude, on monetary policy, we have one instrument, and one goal – ensuring that
inflation stabilises at target in the medium-term. While we must remain vigilant for any signs
of inflation expectations drifting upwards, the news on that front is encouraging. On the other
side, the risk we must be careful not to underestimate is the deflationary consequences of
the credit crisis.
At the moment we are focused on the risk that the slowdown in the real economy will be
amplified through a contraction in banks’ balance sheets. But we should also set in place
longer term measures to prevent such financial imbalances from building up again in the next
upswing. In my view the case for macro-prudential policies alongside monetary policy is
compelling.

Chart 1: Commodity Prices

Chart 2: CPI Inflation
Percentage points
5

Index: Jan. 2007 = 100
300

Energy
Food and non-alcoholic beverages
CPI (per cent)

Brent oil price
Wholesale gas price

250

4

Economist food-price index
200

3

150

2

100

1

50

0

0
Jan 07 Apr 07 Jul 07 Oct 07 Jan 08 Apr 08 Jul 08

6

-1
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

BIS Review 114/2008

Chart 3: Inflation expectations

Chart 4: Three month Libor spreads

Per cent

5
5-10 years ahead
[YouGov/Citigroup]

4
3

Basis points
Sterling

180

Euro

160

US dollar

140
120
100

2
12 m onths ahead
[Bank NOP]

12 m onths ahead
[YouGov/Citigroup]

80
60

1

40

0
2003

2004

2005

2007

20

2008

0
Jan Mar May Jul
2007

Chart 5: Credit conditions on mortgage
lending

Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul
08

Sep
09

Chart 6: Feedback effects (I)

Net percentage balances(b)
Factors contributing to
60
changes in credit availability

Credit
availability

Changing
economic
outlook

Changing cost/
availability of
funds

Weaker growth and
falling house (and other
collateral ) values

40
20
+
0

(3)

-

20
40

Bank losses (1)

Tighter credit
conditions (2)

60
Q2

Q4
2007

Q2
08

Q2 Q4
Q2
2007 08

BIS Review 114/2008

Q2 Q4
Q2
2007
08

7

Chart 7: Feedback effects (II)
Higher funding costs

Deterioration in the
property market

Falling
house prices

Increase in
loss given
default

Increase
in credit
losses

Squeeze on net
interest income
Erosion of
capital ratios

Macroeconomic
slowdown

Increase
in default

Scarring effect
on capacity

Increase
in risk
weights

Regulatory
minima

Pressure to
deleverage

Higher income
gearing
Tighter credit conditions

Chart 8: Liquid assets ratio

Chart 9: Leverage ratios of major UK banks
P e r c e nt a ge of

35%

t ot a l a sse t s
(all cur rencies)

30%

Maximum-minimum range
Interquartile range
Median

Ratio
65
60
55

25%

50
45
40
35
30
25

20%

15%

10%

5%

1967

1972

1977

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

Liquid asset s inclues: Cash, BoEbalances, money at call, eligible bills and UK gilt s.

8

20
15
10

0%
2007

97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08

BIS Review 114/2008

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the CBI, Institute of
Directors, Leeds Chamber of Commerce and Yorkshire Forward at the Royal Armouries,
Leeds, 21 October 2008.
*

*

*

My first memories of Leeds are from a wet summer in 1958. I was ten years old, we lived on
the moors above Hebden Bridge, and my father took me to my first Test Match –England
against New Zealand at Headingley. It rained all day on both Thursday and Friday, and,
when play started in mid-afternoon on Saturday, on a drying wicket New Zealand were
bowled out by Laker and Lock for 67. So I became a slow bowler. I was taught to bowl – slow
left arm – at Old Town primary school by the headmaster, Alfred Stephenson. During the
morning break he would mark the wickets in chalk in the playground, and draw a small circle
exactly on a length. If we could pitch the ball within that circle he would give us a farthing. As
we improved, and the payout of farthings increased, the morning break became shorter and
shorter – my first lesson in economic incentives, or what is known in the trade as “moral
hazard”.
So let me move forward 50 years to the events of 2008, and describe the nature of the
financial crisis, the steps that governments and central banks have taken to deal with it, and,
most important, the implications of recent events for the UK and world economies.
Since August 2007, the industrialised world has been engulfed by financial turmoil. And,
following the failure of Lehman Brothers on 15 September, an extraordinary, almost
unimaginable, sequence of events began which culminated a week or so ago in the
announcements around the world of a recapitalisation of the banking system. It is difficult to
exaggerate the severity and importance of those events. Not since the beginning of the First
World War has our banking system been so close to collapse. In the second half of
September, companies and non-bank financial institutions accelerated their withdrawal from
even short-term funding of banks, and banks increasingly lost confidence in the safety of
lending to each other. Funding costs rose sharply and for many institutions it was possible to
borrow only overnight. Credit to the real economy almost stopped flowing. In financial
markets, confidence in others fell to a point where investors sought refuge in government
instruments such as US Treasury Bills, which at one point yielded a negative return. Central
banks around the world were providing enormous amounts of liquidity to some institutions
while at the same time taking large deposits from others. Eventually, on 6 and 7 October
even overnight funding started to dry up. Radical action was necessary to ensure the survival
of the banking system. And on the morning of 8 October that action was taken when the
Prime Minister and Chancellor unveiled a UK plan for recapitalising the banking system on
which the Bank, FSA and Treasury had been working for a while.
Why was radical action necessary? When the financial turmoil began in August 2007,
markets for a number of financial instruments, including mortgage-backed securities, dried
up. Most observers expected this closure to be short-lived, and the predominant view was
that the crisis was one of (a lack of) liquidity. But, as time passed and markets did not reopen, it became clear that the problem was deeper seated, and concerned the solvency of
the banking system and the sustainability of its funding model. Attempts to deal with the
problem by injections of liquidity from central banks led to temporary alleviations of the
symptoms, but, after an initial improvement, conditions would deteriorate again.
The scale of central bank liquidity support during the crisis has been unprecedented, and all
central banks have increased the scale of their lending in broadly similar ways. The UK
taxpayer now has a larger claim on the assets of banks (in the form of collateral held by the
Bank of England) than the total equity value of UK banks. Massive injections of central bank

BIS Review 128/2008

1

liquidity have played a vital role in staving off an imminent collapse of the banking system.
Such lending can tide a bank over while it is taking steps to remove the cause of the
concerns that generated a run or lack of confidence. But it can also serve to conceal the
severity of the underlying problems, and put off the inevitable day of reckoning.
I hope it is now understood that the provision of central bank liquidity, while essential to buy
time, is not, and never could be, the solution to the banking crisis, nor to the problems of
individual banks. Central bank liquidity is sticking plaster, useful and important, but not a
substitute for proper treatment.
Just as a fever is itself only a symptom of an underlying condition, so the freezing of
interbank and money markets was the symptom of deeper structural problems in the banking
sector. So let me explain why a major recapitalisation of the banking system was necessary,
was the centrepiece of the UK plan (alongside a temporary guarantee of some wholesale
funding instruments and provision of central bank liquidity), and was in turn followed by other
European countries and the United States.
Securitised mortgages – that is collections of mortgages bundled together and sold as
securities, including the now infamous US sub-prime mortgages – had been marketed during
a period of rising house prices and low interest rates which had masked the riskiness of the
underlying loans. By securitising mortgages on such a scale, banks transformed the liquidity
of their lending book. They also financed it by short-term wholesale borrowing. But in the light
of rising defaults and falling house prices – first in the United States and then elsewhere –
investors reassessed the risks inherent in these securities. Perceived as riskier, their values
fell and demand for securitisations dwindled. For the same reason, the value of banks’
mortgage books declined. Banks saw the value of their assets fall while their liabilities
remained unchanged. The effect was magnified by the very high levels of borrowing relative
to capital (or leverage) with which many banks were operating, and the fact that banks had
purchased significant quantities of securitised and more complex financial instruments from
each other. Not only were these assets difficult to value, but the distribution of losses across
the financial system was uncertain. Banks’ share prices fell. Capital was squeezed.
Markets were sending a clear message to banks around the world: they did not have enough
capital. At the Annual Meetings of the IMF and World Bank in Washington ten days ago, the
message was reinforced by our colleagues from Japan, Sweden and Finland, who, with
eloquence and not a little passion, reminded those present of their experience in dealing with
a systemic banking failure in the 1990s. Recapitalise and do it now was the lesson.
Recapitalisation requires a fiscal response, and that can be done only by governments.
Confidence in the banking system had eroded as the weakness of the capital position
became more widely appreciated. But it took a crisis caused by the failure of Lehman
Brothers to trigger the coordinated government plan to recapitalise the system. It would be a
mistake, however, to think that had Lehman Brothers not failed, a crisis would have been
averted. The underlying cause of inadequate capital would eventually have provoked a crisis
of one kind or another somewhere else.
So where does this leave us? The recapitalisation plan is having a major impact on the
restoration of market confidence in banks. Perhaps the single most important diagnostic
statistic is the credit default swap premium – an indicator of market concerns about solvency
of banks. These premia have fallen markedly since the announcement of the UK plan. From
the close of business on 7 October to now the premia on the UK’s five largest banks have
more than halved. We are far from the end of the road back to stability, but the plan to
recapitalise our banking system, both here and abroad, will I believe come to be seen as the
moment in the banking crisis of the past year when we turned the corner.
As concerns about the viability of our banks recede, banks should regain the confidence of
the market as recipients of funding. There are already some signs of greater activity. But the
age of innocence – when banks lent to each other unsecured for three months or longer at
only a small premium to expected policy rates – will not quickly, if ever, return. In itself that

2

BIS Review 128/2008

does not affect the ability of banks to fund lending, but confidence has been badly shaken
after the traumatic events of the past few weeks. New sources of funding will develop only
slowly, although the temporary government guarantees of new lending to banks will help. So
it will take time before the recapitalisation leads to a resumption of normal levels of lending
by the banking system to the real economy. And we cannot assume that there will not be
problems in other parts of the financial system and in some emerging market economies to
be overcome before the crisis can truly be described as over.
With the plan for recapitalisation in place, the focus of attention has moved to the outlook for
the UK and world economies. Over the past month, the economic news has probably been
the worst in such a short period for a very considerable time. The most recent activity
indicators for the second of half of the year have fallen sharply. In the UK, unemployment
continues to rise and, over the past three months, has risen at the fastest rate for seventeen
years, albeit from a relatively low level. House prices declined by about 5% in the third
quarter and are 13% lower than a year ago. The recent weakness of the housing market is
likely to continue. And if the news on the domestic front were not sufficiently discouraging,
the rest of the world economy also appears to be slowing rapidly.
Why has the outlook deteriorated so quickly? The banking crisis dealt a severe blow to the
availability of credit. Growth in secured lending to households fell to an annualised rate of
1.9% in the three months to August, its lowest level in more than a decade. The Bank of
England’s survey of credit conditions suggests that the terms on which banks provide credit
to companies have tightened even further. And, on some estimates, the supply of finance to
the UK corporate sector has ground to a halt. This credit shock has come on top of a fall in
real disposable incomes resulting from the rise in energy and food prices earlier in the year.
So, taken together, the combination of a squeeze on real take-home pay and a decline in the
availability of credit poses the risk of a sharp and prolonged slowdown in domestic demand.
Indeed, it now seems likely that the UK economy is entering a recession.
At the same time, consumer price inflation, our target measure, has risen from around the
2% target at the beginning of the year to a worryingly high rate of 5.2% in September. Oil and
other commodity and food prices have all been rising very rapidly. In those circumstances, it
was sensible to allow those price changes to be absorbed by movements in consumer
prices. The alternative would have been an even sharper slowdown in the economy. Central
banks in other countries also find themselves in a similar position. Over the past year or so,
CPI inflation rose from 2.0% to 5.6% in the United States and from 1.7% to 4.0% in the euroarea.
It is surely probable that the drama of the banking crisis, which is unprecedented in the
lifetime of almost all of us, will damage business and consumer confidence more generally.
But two pieces of good news should temper the gloom. First, the banking system will be
recapitalised and, in due course, the banking system will resume more normal lending,
although by normal I do not mean the conditions that prevailed prior to August 2007. Second,
oil prices have now fallen from a peak of $147 a barrel only three months ago to around $70
today. And wholesale gas prices have now also started to follow oil prices down. That will
help to support the growth of real incomes as well as bringing down inflation.
So, what should the Monetary Policy Committee do now? It must continue to set Bank Rate
in order to meet the 2% inflation target, not next month or the month after, but further ahead
when the impact of recent developments in both credit supply and world commodity prices
will have worked their way through the economy. This is the time not to abandon but to
reinforce our commitment to stability. The slowdown in demand, and the recent falls in
energy prices, will bring inflation back towards the target. The Committee must balance the
risk that a prolonged slowdown in domestic demand pulls inflation materially below the target
against the risk that today’s high inflation rate becomes embedded in inflation expectations.
During the past month, the balance of risks to inflation in the medium term shifted decisively

BIS Review 128/2008

3

to the downside. And the MPC – in an action co-ordinated with six other major central banks
– cut Bank Rate by half a percentage point to 4.5%.
Looking ahead, the outlook is obviously very uncertain – both for the world as well as our
own economy. The MPC cannot simply extrapolate the past into the future. The prospects for
oil and other commodity prices are difficult to assess. So too are the period over which bank
lending will return to normal and the extent of the damage to business and consumer
confidence. Moreover, the credit crunch affects not just demand but also the supply potential
of the economy, complicating the assessment of the inflationary impact of changes in the
level of demand. The associated shift of resources away from those parts of the economy
that have flourished in recent years towards other areas of economic activity will moderate
the increase in potential output while that adjustment is taking place. The MPC must monitor
carefully all the available evidence about fast-changing patterns of spending, supply and
prices. It will act promptly to ensure that inflation remains on track to meet our target.
The downturn in the economy will affect not just monetary policy but fiscal policy too. That
subject is for another occasion, but there is one point I do want to make tonight. The cost of
supporting the banking system will inevitably raise the level of national debt. Managed
properly, however, such a rise in national debt need not prove inflationary. Indeed, within a
reasonable period it should be possible for the Government to reduce its stake in the banking
system, for example by selling units in a Bank Reconstruction Fund, and repay the additional
debt that had been issued. That is one difference between past increases in national debt in
times of war and the increase now to pay for recapitalisation of the banking system which
involves the acquisition of an asset.
Let me take you back again to 1958. In the very first television interview given by a Governor
of the Bank of England, Cameron Cobbold explained national debt to Robin Day on “Tell the
People”, the highlight of ITN’s Sunday evening schedule fifty years ago. Here is the
exchange:
Cobbold:

The National Debt represents the sums of money which the Government have
over the years borrowed from the public, mainly in this country and, to some
extent, abroad. That is really the amount of expenditure which they have failed
over the period to cover by revenue.

Day:

Have we paid for World War II?

Cobbold:

No.

Day:

Have we paid for World War I?

Cobbold:

No.

Day:

Have we paid for the Battle of Waterloo?

Cobbold:

I don’t think you can exactly say that.

On this occasion, we should have little difficulty in evaluating when we have paid for the
recapitalisation. There are, though, questions about the source of the funding and the level of
borrowing by the country as a whole from overseas. For several years, the UK banking
sector has been relying extensively on external capital flows, principally short-term wholesale
funding, to finance its lending activities. Those external inflows have fallen sharply – a mild
form of the reversal of capital inflows experienced by a number of emerging market
economies in the 1990s. Unless they are replaced by other forms of external finance, the
adjustments in the trade deficit and exchange rate will need to be larger and faster than
would otherwise have occurred, implying a larger rise in domestic saving and weaker
domestic spending in the short run.
With the bank recapitalisation plan in place, we now face a long, slow haul to restore lending
to the real economy, and hence growth of our economy, to more normal conditions. The past
few weeks have been somewhat too exciting. The actions that were taken were not designed

4

BIS Review 128/2008

to save the banks as such, but to protect the rest of the economy from the banks. I hope
banks will come to appreciate, just as the New Zealanders at Headingley in 1958, the
Yorkshire virtues of patience and sound defence when batting on a sticky wicket. I have said
many times that successful monetary policy would appear rather boring. So let me extend an
invitation to the banking industry to join me in promoting the idea that a little more boredom
would be no bad thing. The long march back to boredom and stability starts tonight in Leeds.

BIS Review 128/2008

5

John Gieve: Rebuilding confidence in the financial system
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the BBA’s 12th
Annual Supervision Conference, London, 28 October 2008.
*

*

*

We are publishing today our bi-annual Financial Stability Report, and so I want to start my
presentation by looking at the wider context of the debate on supervision, on which this
conference is focusing.
The word unprecedented is used too frequently. But the instability in financial markets over
the last year – culminating in the seizure of money markets in recent weeks (Chart 1) – has
been the most severe in living memory.
It did not come out of the blue. The price of risk especially in credit markets had fallen to
unsustainable levels by summer 2007 and many banks and other institutions had become
reliant on sustained liquidity in new markets which had never had been tested by a downturn.
In the July 2006 FSR, for example the Bank warned of “UK banks’ increasing dependence on
wholesale funding” and, in April 2007, we noted that: “if UK banks were unable to securitise
existing assets, new lending would need to be financed through other wholesale sources,
which may be difficult or costly to access during times of stress.” So it proved.
But the Bank was not alone in pointing to the vulnerabilities in the financial system in 2006
and 2007. Other commentators and authorities gave similar warnings. And many market
participants were also expecting a correction at some point; but they generally felt they were
well placed to handle it. In fact the severity and breadth of the downswing has surprised
markets, commentators, and policymakers alike.
In the light of subsequent developments, a number of commentators have concluded that the
problem was simply a lack of attention and short memories. I don’t think it was quite as
simple as that. I am with Mark Twain who said "History doesn't repeat itself, but it does
rhyme." While the current crisis has some similarities to previous downswings – in the early
90s or of the 70s for example – there are some significant differences too.
For example the last three recessions in the UK (in the 70s, 80s and early 90s) were
preceded by sharp rises in consumption and activity and earnings to well above sustainable
rates. As Chart 2 shows that was not true of the last few years when consumption, output
and earnings all seemed unusually stable.
Again in previous recessions, stress in the banking sector has tended to follow on from
defaults and losses on domestic loans as interest rates rise and the economy slows down.
But this time the downturn started in the banking sector – last summer when losses in the US
property market not only led to losses in UK banks trading and treasury books but closed
important sources of finance to them. The downturn in the housing market and then the wider
economy followed. Domestic default rates, while beginning to rise, are still low by historical
standards, despite the fact that we are more than a year into the crisis.
Those differences reflect the most important distinguishing feature of this downturn, namely
its roots in global imbalances not just in trade but in the financial system.
The growth and savings in emerging economies led to an extraordinary flow of funds back to
the developed world and to the US in particular. That in turn kept interest rates low, allowing
the rapid growth of credit and fuelling a sharp rise in asset prices and an increasingly risky
search for yield – for example in sub prime housing in the US.
The impact in the UK was different but no less marked. Here too the low cost of credit fuelled
a spectacular expansion of bank balance sheets (Chart 3) and with it a growth in leverage
(Chart 4). And, as Chart 5 shows, while savings rates fell in the UK, limiting the growth of

BIS Review 132/2008

1

retail deposits, banks financed that lending by tapping wholesale markets. The gap between
customer lending and deposits moved from zero at the turn of the century to over £700 billion
in 2008 H1.
Much of that funding was ultimately sourced overseas. In particular, the United States acted
as an intermediary, attracting capital inflows from the rest of the world and exporting these
funds to other countries. Road shows to investors in the US and Europe ceased to be the
preserve of the international giants and became common among smaller players whose
whole asset base was in the UK.
As the difficulties in the financial system have persisted and worsened, it has become clear
that these developments have created real structural weaknesses in the banking sector. In
particular:
•

inflated aggregate balance sheets, whose expansion had outpaced growth in the
real economy;

•

expansion into assets whose underlying value, credit quality and liquidity were
uncertain;

•

liability structures which were overly reliant on sustained availability of wholesale
funding whose maturity was often short;

•

capital and liquidity buffers which became too low , given these asset and liability
risks; and

•

underappreciated, but potent interconnections between firms in the global financial
system.

Policy response
For most of the last year, the Bank has adopted a twin track approach, as part of the
Tripartite partnership with the FSA and the Treasury. The first track has been to provide
liquidity to the market in order to give most banks time to make the necessary adjustments –
including by raising capital. That has involved an increasing range of measures including
long term repos on a wide range of collateral and the introduction of the Special Liquidity
Scheme which allows banks to swap illiquid assets for Treasury Bills for periods of up to
three years. The recent dollar swaps and further extensions of the SLS and eligible collateral
are further steps in that direction. And we recently announced a more permanent structure of
money market operations including the introduction of a discount window.
The second track has been to work closely with the FSA and Treasury to limit the
repercussions from the failure of banks which do not have an independent future whether
through arranging mergers or managing closure. Northern Rock was the first in line and led
to a lot of criticism of the tripartite. I think we have learned a great deal over the year and
have shown more skill and speed with subsequent cases including Bradford and Bingley
recently.
But in the last 6 weeks it became clear that this case by case approach was not enough
either at home or internationally. Despite the provision of additional liquidity to the system,
market conditions got worse over the summer as worries grew about the downturn in the
broader economy and its consequences for bank losses.
Once again the triggers for a further downward lurch came in the US. First Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac were taken into conservatorship and then, the following weekend, Lehman
Brothers proved unable to find a buyer and filed for bankruptcy. That shook markets which
had expected it to be saved by the State, if necessary, as had been the case with Bear
Stearns earlier in the year.

2

BIS Review 132/2008

Within a day, AIG had to be rescued following rumours about the size of its losses on CDS
contracts and pressures grew on the remaining securities dealers. Later in the week,
Secretary Paulson announced his initial $700 billion plan to purchase assets to support the
banking sector. It didn’t entirely still the doubts.
The pressures were also felt in Europe. At the end of September Dexia, Fortis and Hypo
Real Estate all had to receive emergency capital injections, mostly government supplied. In
the UK the authorities facilitated a rapid consolidation in the mortgage sector with Abbey
Santander buying Alliance and Leicester, some mergers in the building society sector, and
the proposed merger of LTSB and HBOS. Finally, in late September the Tripartite authorities
intervened to resolve growing difficulties in Bradford and Bingley by transferring the deposits
and branch network to Abbey Santander and taking the remaining assets and liabilities into
public ownership for orderly wind down.
But the loss of confidence went wider than a subset of vulnerable banks. Our report
estimates the total US and European marked to market losses on credit assets at nearly $2.8
trillion. While these will not all fall on banks and may exaggerate the losses to those who can
hold debt to maturity, investors and counterparties became worried about the extent of the
likely losses on banking and trading books in a wider range of institutions and in their ability
to continue to finance their businesses. The focus of their concerns shifted from future
profitability to future survival. CDS premia rose to unprecedented levels (Chart 6), bank
equity prices fell sharply and the money markets seized up. Interbank lending spreads
widened dramatically (Chart 7) and lending became almost entirely concentrated in the
overnight market. The shortening of interbank maturities generated a dangerous “snowball”
effect as maturing term funding had to be rolled overnight.
It was to tackle that wider loss of confidence that the UK authorities announced on 8th of
October its comprehensive package of support for recapitalisation, guaranteed funding and
enhanced liquidity. It was designed to remove solvency fears by ensuring that banks had
more than sufficient capital to survive a severe economic downturn and thus to enable them
to continue to lend on normal criteria to good credits.
The new capital and the government guaranteed borrowing and liquidity support was
designed to ensure and be seen to ensure that banks would be able to sustain their
businesses through a downturn. With the banking system fully solvent, guarantees could be
extended without exposing taxpayer to unacceptable risks. In a remarkable show of
international consensus, a similar approach was quickly adopted by many other countries
both in the US and EU and more widely.
Looking ahead
The early signs suggest that the package is underpinning the banking system both directly
and as a demonstration of the authorities’ determination to do whatever is needed to reestablish confidence. In particular CDS premia for banks have fallen markedly (Chart 6)
since the package was announced. And progress on guarantees, while gradual, has also
been encouraging, with a number of banks issuing bonds even without the use of the
guarantee. Libor spreads have also edged down and are now expected to fall a bit further
and faster than before the package (Chart 8). Many banks continue to face a period of
deleveraging and rebalancing to reduce their dependence on Central Bank finance and on
short term wholesale funding. However a stronger capital and financing position will make it
possible for them to do that over a period of some years, which will diminish the squeeze on
lending in the short run.
More widely, of course, the financial system remains under acute strain. The falls in equity
markets, corporate bond prices and the prices for leveraged loans is hitting both long term
institutional investors and leveraged investors, including hedge funds. Some are being forced
to sell into a falling market in response to margin calls and redemptions.

BIS Review 132/2008

3

And there are growing signs of stress in many emerging market economies. We have
already seen a banking sector and currency crisis in Iceland and in the past few days the
IMF has also announced loan packages for the Ukraine and Hungary.
In short, the package of measures introduced in the UK and elsewhere has improved the
prospects significantly, especially for banks but it is too soon to declare the crisis over.
Authorities worldwide need to remain vigilant and to be ready to step in again if necessary.
The medium term agenda
We all have lessons to learn from the turmoil of the last fifteen months. I would like to pick
out three in particular, two of which are international and one UK specific:
•

the need to develop new “macro prudential” policies to bridge the gap between
monetary policy and the regulation of particular institutions and markets;

•

the need to establish a more effective regime in the UK for handling failing banks;
and

•

the need to improve the handling of cross border crises and bank failures.

Central Banks have always paid close attention to asset prices and credit growth in deciding
monetary policy but they are setting interest rates for the whole economy and there is no
guarantee that the rate or the rapid changes in rates that could be needed to dampen asset
price growth will be appropriate more widely.
On the other side, regulation and supervision are focused on the resilience and conduct of
individual institutions: their management, risks controls, capital and liquidity and so on. What
we have found in the last few years is that the sum of what makes sense at the level of
individual institutions does not necessarily add up to what is needed for the system as a
whole.
We need to develop what are called “macro prudential” policies to bridge that gap. In
particular we need to establish stronger restraints on the build up of risks in the financial
system over the cycle with the dangers they bring to the wider economy. That means not just
increasing capital and liquidity requirements for individual institutions but relating them to the
cyclical pressures in the system more broadly.
One way of doing that has been developed in Spain. It is called “dynamic provisioning”. Chart
9 illustrates how it works. It requires banks to build up a general loss reserve during good
times, based on past experience of likely losses on new lending. The effect is to build up
reserves when loans are originated which can then be drawn down when the economy
begins to deteriorate and actual losses are incurred. That would lessen the need to raise
capital in downturns. And as draw downs on these general provisions would be automatic,
the market should not view this as negatively as reductions in regulatory capital ratios.
The second lesson comes directly from our experience with Northern Rock where even after
the bank had become totally dependent on the State, there was no legal framework for
resolving its future quickly and effectively. No regulatory regime can prevent all bank failures.
So it is important, for financial stability, that any such failures are orderly. That is the role of
the Special Resolution Regime, a key component of the Banking Bill.
The SRR gives four tools to the three Tripartite Authorities to cope with failing institutions:
•

First, the transfer of all or part of a bank’s business to a private sector purchaser;
something we have already seen used in the resolution of Bradford and Bingley and
Kaupthing under the Special Provisions Act.

•

Second, the transfer of the viable part of a bank’s business to a temporary bridge
bank owned by the Bank of England. This would allow continuity of banking services

4

BIS Review 132/2008

for its customers whilst enabling due diligence by potential private sector purchasers
and providing for the orderly wind down of the rump.
•

Third, temporary public ownership which would give the treasury the power to transfer
the shares of a failing bank to a nominee of the Treasury. This power would be used
in cases where significant amounts of public sector funds are required to stabilise the
failing bank or where long term restructuring of the bank is necessary.

•

Fourth bank insolvency procedures – a last resort. This would look much like a
standard company insolvency but with the important difference that the liquidator’s
primary objective would be to assist the FSCS in protecting depositors.

I can understand why there has been some nervousness among banks and investors about
this regime and particularly about the powers to split failing banks into “good” and “bad”
parts. But equally I think they can see that when a bank is failing it is in everyone’s interests
to resolve the situation quickly and cleanly. I hope that they will be reassured by the
extensive safeguards we are now proposing, including the guarantee that no creditor will be
made worse off in such a split than they would have been in a conventional insolvency and
protection of netting and set-off.
Finally, the financial turmoil has also revealed the need for better international crisis
management. The experience of Lehmans has shown once again the problems that arise in
the insolvency of a large international bank with operations in many countries. We also saw
in late September and early October the danger emerging, of the banking equivalent of the
old beggar thy neighbour policy on currency depreciation, as individual countries began to
guarantee their own banks’ debt. On the other side, recent events have also demonstrated
how effective international action can be: the coordinated interest rate cuts on the 8th of
October; the provision of dollar liquidity by central banks and the adoption of national
measures to support banks at international meetings during the weekend of 11/12 October.
International groups such as the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) have already started to take
action. It has begun to develop a practical checklist of issues and principles that should guide
the management of a distressed cross-border institution.
Having started with Mark Twain I want to finish with another quote this time from Santayana:
“A man’s memory may …become the art of continually varying and
misrepresenting his past, according to his interests in the present.” 1
One lesson from recent events is the need for rigour, balance and transparency in policy
making and risk assessment. I hope that the Bank can play a part in that in future as it has in
the past.

1

“Reasons and places”, George Santayana.

BIS Review 132/2008

5

Chart 1: Financial market liquidity

Chart 2: Household consumption growth: what
happened to the boom?

Liquidity index
1.0

Percentage changes on a year earlier
10
1973 Q3
1980 Q1
1990 Q3
2008 Q3

0.5
+
0.0

8
6
4

0.5
2

1.0

0

1.5

-2

2.0

-4
-6

2.5
92

94

96

98

00

02

04

06

08

-16

-12

-8

-4

0

4

8

12

16

Quarters

Sources: Bank of England. Bloomberg, Chicago Board Options
Exchange, Debt Management Office, London Stock Exchange, Merrill
Lynch, Thomson Datastream and Bank calculations

Chart 3: Bank lending to households and nonfinancial companies in the UK

Chart 4: Major UK banks’ leverage ratio

Percentage of GDP
100
90
80
Households

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Non-financial companies

0
70

74

78

82

86

90

94

98

02

06

Sources: Bank of England, Thomson Datastream and Bank
calculations.

6

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations

BIS Review 132/2008

Chart 5: Major UK banks’ customer funding
gap, household saving ratio and foreign
interbank deposits

Chart 6: Major UK banks’ and LCFIs’ credit
default swap premia

Major UK banks
US commercial banks

(c)

US securities houses
European LCFIs

Jul.

Sep. Nov. Jan. Mar. May. Jul.

2007

Basis points
700
650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Sep.

08

Sources: Bank of England, Dealogic, ONS, published accounts
and Bank calculations.

Sources: Markit Group Limited , Thomson Datastream, published
accounts and Bank calculations.

Chart 7: Three-month interbank rates relative
to expected policy rates

Chart 8: Three-month UK interbank rate relative
to expected policy rates

Sterling

Basis points
250

Basis points
Euro
400

US dollar

200

350
300
(d)(e)

150

250

Forward spread on
7 October 2008 (c)

(c)
200
150

100

Forward spread on
20 October 2008 (c)

100

50

50
0
Jan.

Apr.

2007

Jul.

Oct.

Jan.

Apr.

Jul.

Oct.

Sources: Bloomberg
08 and Bank calculations.

0
Jul.

2008

Sep.

Nov.

Jan.

Mar.

May.

Jul.

09
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations

BIS Review 132/2008

7

Chart 9: Dynamic provisioning

Specific provisions as a percentage of total loans
General provisions as a percentage of total loans
Total provisions as a percentage of total loans

Upswing

Per cent of total loans

Downturn

0

Time

Table 1: Key actions to improve resilience

• Macroprudential tools are needed to guard against systemic risk
• Capital levels need to rise and need to be of sufficient quality
• Liquidity standards should be strengthened
• Strengthen the legal framework for depositor protection and bank
resolution
• Better management of cross-border financial institutions
• More disclosure, including potential future balance sheet volatility
• Developing centralised infrastructures for over-the-counter
instruments

8

BIS Review 132/2008

John Gieve: Learning from the financial crisis
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, 2008 Europe in the
World Lecture Panel Discussion, at the European Business School, London,
19 November 2008.
*

*

*

The years after sterling left the ERM were the most successful and stable in my lifetime. In
early 2007, for example, inflation had not moved by more than a single percentage point
away from target in the previous 10 years, the output of the economy had grown in every
quarter since 1992 Q3 (Chart 1), unemployment had fallen by 5 percentage points from its
peak in the early 1990s and living standards had steadily increased. Interest rates had been
low and stable.
However as we know now, that was the end of “the Great Stability”. The summer ushered in
a period of extraordinary turmoil in Western financial markets which we are still trying to
calm. And this year has seen the onset of recession not just in Europe but throughout the
advanced economies. Despite the dramatic policy measures of the last months, the outlook
for 2009 is bleak and the prospects beyond are uncertain.
That move – in the space of only 12 months – from the policy maker’s dream of steady noninflationary growth to the biggest banking crisis since the outbreak of World War I and the
onset of recession sets the questions for this evening.
First, how did we get into this position?
Second, what are the immediate challenges for policy?
And finally, what lessons should we draw for the future?
How did we get here?
The path that led from losses in the US sub prime housing market to a collapse of confidence
in the Western banking system and a savage credit squeeze has been described many
times, most recently in the Bank’s Financial Stability and Inflation Reports. I don’t need to
repeat that here but I would highlight two features: first this is a global story; second, the
nature of the crisis has changed over the past 15 months and has called for a changing
policy response.
A global crisis
You cannot explain recent developments on a national basis, even in the US. The roots of
the crisis lay in global imbalances in trade and capital flows between advanced and emerging
economies. The rapid growth of exports from Asia, and latterly the Gulf, was reflected in a
substantial build up of savings. In China the national saving rate peaked in exceeded 50% of
GDP. Those funds flowed back to the developed world and to the US in particular. That kept
interest rates low and allowed a rapid growth of credit. Following the dotcom bubble, there
was a particular appetite for fixed income investments which led to an increasingly risky
search for yield. That was the platform for the excesses of lending to the sub-prime housing
market in the US and a sharp rise in house prices more generally.
The impact was not confined to the US. The flow of funds into the US was re-exported to the
advanced economies, especially through the growing securitisation markets, and helped
finance the rapid increases in house prices in the UK (Chart 2) and many other countries.
And that internationalisation of markets was reflected also in the build up in our banks of
portfolios of AAA-rated securities which offered a slightly better yield than traditional bonds
and many of which were based on sub-prime assets.

BIS Review 145/2008

1

So when losses emerged in sub-prime market, they not only hit US banks but ricocheted
through the international financial system. Much of the commentary has focused on the
structured credit losses in banks’ trading books and treasuries and they have certainly been
large.
But equally as important was the impact on the liability side of balance sheets. Banks had not
only expanded their balance sheets too far, they had in the process become reliant on
wholesale funding markets which had not been tested in a downturn. In the UK, the gap
between customer lending and deposits moved from zero at the turn of the century to over
£700 billion in 2008 H1 (Chart 3). That proved a structural weakness when investors realised
that the AAA label concealed substantial and uncertain risks and withdrew from the
securitisation markets.
Just as the origins of the crisis lay in global imbalances its effects are also global. Initially, the
impact of the crisis seemed to be concentrated in the US and a handful of European banks in
Germany, the UK and Switzerland which had pursued particularly risky strategies. The euro
area as a whole did not see a marked reduction in credit growth. Meanwhile the emerging
economies of Asia continued to boom. With wages and prices rising, many of the people I
met in India and China at the start of the year rather welcomed the prospect of a fall in
Western demand as a means of taking a little of the heat out of their own economies.
But despite different starting points and policies, we have now seen bank failures in many
countries in Europe and acute pressures develop everywhere. And the US, Japan, the euro
area and the UK have all entered recession. This summer has also brought a slowdown in
growth in the Far East and other emerging economies which is likely to test political as well
as economic regimes.
The challenge for policy
It was clear last autumn that the financial crisis was leading to a squeeze on credit and
lowering the prospects for growth and inflation in the UK. That was why the MPC, which had
been raising rates as late as July, cut Bank Rate in December last year and followed with two
more reductions in February and April. While the euro area started with lower rates and
initially seemed less affected than the UK by a credit crunch, expected increases in rates
were delayed.
However, these downside pressures were not the only challenge to policy. Oil prices which
had been pushed up by the rapid growth in emerging markets took another dramatic jump
and food prices began rising more quickly too. Between 2007 and mid-2008 oil more than
doubled in price, while food prices rose by around 80%. At the same time sterling which had
climbed to $2.10 in November 2007, fell back. The result was that consumer price inflation in
the UK rose well above target to 3% in April and over 5% in September, its highest rate since
1992 (while RPI inflation has been over 4% for all but 4 months out of the past two years).
Not surprisingly expectations of inflation also rose sharply (Chart 4), raising the risk that
higher inflation would become embedded in decisions on the prices for other goods and
services and on pay. Of course commodity prices and inflation more generally have now
begun to come down but I believe the risk of dislodging expectations was a real one, not a
mirage. Certainly I felt that to reduce rates during months when inflation was not only rising
rapidly, but was rising faster than we had forecast, would be confusing and might weaken
confidence in our resolution and the credibility of the inflation target . On similar grounds,
despite the appreciation of the euro, the ECB raised rates in July this year.
In the spring and early summer, the financial crisis also was showing some signs of
stabilising in the US and in Europe, particularly after the takeover of Bear Stearns in March
signalled that the “state safety net” in the US had been extended to cover investment as well
as commercial banks. The introduction of the Special Liquidity Scheme in April here and
extensive liquidity measures in the US led to a period in which funding pressures eased and

2

BIS Review 145/2008

Libor spreads and CDS premia softened. Our August forecast was for a pronounced but
limited deterioration in growth. The threat of a strengthening feedback loop from a
contracting banking sector to a severe downturn in the real economy had not disappeared
but did not seem the central case.
But the risks and the challenges changed dramatically in the autumn.
First, the losses incurred by investors in the rescues of Fannie and Freddie combined with
the decision to allow Lehman Brothers to go into administration, led to a dramatic loss of
confidence in financial markets (Chart 5) threatening a savage further twist in the squeeze
on credit for households and companies.
Second, we saw a sharp weakening in oil prices (Chart 6), with the odds implied by options
of such a fall less than 1%. Other commodity prices also fell. And, even before that was
reflected in consumer prices, the public’s inflation expectations turned down decisively.
In short, the balance of risks between inflation being above or below target in the medium
term shifted decisively to the downside.
That was the background to the internationally coordinated reductions in interest rates in
early October and the aggressive cut of 150 basis points in Bank Rate in November, the
largest reduction in official interest rates since 1992 (indeed I believe it was only the third
time Bank rate had been cut by 150bp since the Bank was founded over 300 years ago).
Even so, our latest medium term projections for inflation show inflation remaining below
target in the medium term and suggest further reductions may be necessary (Chart 7). Of
course, there are large uncertainties around that projection; more so than usual. In particular,
they take no account of any fiscal measures that the Government may announce next week.
Just as we had to change gears on monetary policy, so we needed to change our approach
to the banking sector. The tripartite authorities – the Bank, FSA and Treasury – were
criticised for the handling of Northern Rock and for being slow off the mark when the crisis
started in 2007. But we learned from that experience. We have established new ways of
providing the market with the liquidity that it needs. And, as the crisis has widened, we have
dealt with vulnerable and failing banks, such as Bradford and Bingley, more speedily and
cleanly.
But as the crisis deepened in late September, it became clear that we needed more than a
case by case approach here to tackle the continuing loss of confidence in the banking
system in the UK, in euro area and in the US. On 8 October therefore we announced a
comprehensive package of measures including support for recapitalisation, guaranteed
funding and enhanced liquidity. That very quickly became the template for action in other
advanced and some emerging countries.
The central plank of the package was the offer to underwrite capital issuance of at least £50
billion and it is important to be clear what that was intended to do. It was not to establish new
regulatory minimum ratios. It was intended to underpin confidence in the banks and to
ensure that each institution would have a sufficient capital buffer both to absorb losses that
are likely to arise during a recession and to continue lending on normal commercial criteria.
Under the new Basel II rules the ratio of capital to risk weighted assets is almost bound to fall
as arrears and losses mount. The aim of the package was to create the headroom for that to
happen and to remove the capital pressure on banks to deleverage quickly by refusing even
good credit requests.
The capital raising is not complete of course but the process is underway. Banks and
building societies have already secured around £50 billion of guaranteed funding in the
market and has facilitated new bank debt issuance without the need of a guarantee. Overall
there has been some easing in the money markets and some repair in confidence. The
complete seizure that was looming has been averted.

BIS Review 145/2008

3

However, we are clearly not out of the woods yet. Financial markets across the world are still
badly impaired; spreads have not yet returned to their summer levels; and, while banks look
more secure, many hedge funds for example are under increased pressure. In the wider
economy, we are only in the early stages of a recession in the advanced economies and of
the slowdown in emerging markets. So we must be ready to take further action if required
whether monetary, fiscal, or directly in the financial sector.
Lessons for the medium-term
That is the immediate prospect. I want to finish by drawing out some lessons for the medium
term.
1.

Closer international co-ordination of macroeconomic policy

The first lesson is the vital importance of international cooperation in a global economy.
For several years we worried about the growing imbalances between the US in particular and
emerging Asia. We can now see how painful the rebalancing is proving. No doubt we could
do better in national policy making but we also need to recognise that the sum of policies
which make sense at the national level may well not be optimal at the global level. To give
one example, for most economies individually a change in the oil price is an external event –
something beyond the reach of policy. But clearly that is not true of the global economy as
whole.
Of course we have a great deal of experience in the EU of establishing common rules and
policies. We know it is a painstaking process among 27 countries. But on finance and the
economy we need to go wider than the EU and wider than the G7 to engage the new
economies which account for so much of world growth. That is why it was so important and
welcome that the recent meeting in Washington was of the G20 rather than the G7.
Alongside the IMF it is going to play a key role in global macroeconomic coordination.
2.

Better ground rules for cross-border financial crises

The failure of Lehman Brothers has confirmed that cross-border failures of large and
complex firms are just as damaging and difficult to manage as we had feared. We need to
ensure that proper contingency plans are prepared between the authorities most concerned
for failures not just within the EU, where a lot of work is in hand, but on a global basis.
As a start I hope we can establish a robust and predictable framework of rules and
conventions that ensure that home authorities will co-ordinate a cross-border response
better. The Financial Stability Forum is working on these urgently.
This is not easy. In particular emergencies there are often different national interests at stake
and the sheer pressure of events can limit cross-border consultation. However, if we do not
tackle this we will see the growth of national restrictions on the terms on which cross-border
operations are permitted – in terms of capital, liquidity and legal structure – and that could
have great economic costs.
3.

Strengthening banks’ resilience

The financial crisis has revealed a number of gaps and flaws in the regulatory and
accounting conventions especially for banks. We need to put those right quickly and on an
international basis. The G20 Summit has asked the Financial Stability Forum to take that
forward.
For example the events have shown up the lack of any agreement on liquidity requirements
on banks. The FSA is developing proposals for UK which will deliver tougher standards. But

4

BIS Review 145/2008

we are pressing also for international agreement in the Basel Committee. Events also
brought home the need for a fundamental review of both the amount and the definition of
capital requirements.
4.

And developing macro-prudential tools

The last lesson I have drawn is that we need to bridge the gap between macroeconomic
policy and the regulation of individual firms. We need a third club in our bag which can
directly dampen the financial cycle. This is needed both for financial stability and for wider
economic management.
As we have been reminded over the past 15 months, it is primarily in the “bad times” that
banks need to demonstrate that they have adequate financial resources. We need to ensure
that banks build up resources in good times to a greater extent, which can then cushion the
shock in bad times. I think of this as “protecting banks from the economic cycle”.
But we have seen also how the financial sector can drive the wider business cycle, by
becoming over-confident in the upswing and over-constrained (by lack of financial resources
– capital and liquidity) in the downswing. It seems to me that mechanisms which oblige
banks to build up resources in good times can serve a second useful purpose of dampening
the economic cycle. I think of this as “protecting the cycle from banks”.
We need two-way protection and I would like to describe three ways you might go about
providing it.
The first is the Spanish system of dynamic provisions, which requires banks to build a
general reserve that can be drawn on in downturns. Each period, banks are required to make
general provisions equal to the difference between the “inherent” losses (based on the
growth of loans and a long-term average of incurred losses) and the specific provisions on
impaired assets for the period. The difference, if positive, is treated as an expense in the
profit and loss account. If negative, it is treated as income – provided that the general
reserve has been previously built up to the required level.
The specific provisions made by Spanish banks fluctuate substantially through the business
cycle, as one would expect, falling during upswings and increasing in downturns. But the flow
of general provisions moves in the opposite direction, acting as a countercyclical mechanism.
In the last boom, the accumulated stock of total provisions grew steadily between 2005 and
2008, to a level which at the start of this year was twice as large as their non-performing
loans. That figure has fallen sharply in recent quarters, in the face of fast-growing credit
losses, but it did ensure that Spanish banks were better placed than their counterparts in
other countries to absorb such losses without immediately eating into their core capital. The
Bank of Spain estimates the current level of general provisions could absorb losses
associated with a doubtful assets ratio of 9% (the current level is 1.5%). The general reserve
is also substantial in comparison with the tier 1 capital ratios, representing 1.3% of the riskweighted assets.
I know that general provisions fall foul of modern accounting practice and can be unpopular
with tax authorities. But the Spanish example demonstrates that – despite all the technical
arguments there might be about the details – a mechanism with broadly the right features is
practicable and can generate worthwhile additional reserves against the losses which
crystallise in cyclical downturns. It does not require precise estimates of the length of the
cycle, or predictions of when the cycle will turn; and it can be capped, so that the reserve
does not continue to grow inexorably in an extended upswing. I think it merits serious
consideration for more widespread adoption, irrespective of the accounting and tax treatment
such reserves might attract.
One key feature of such reserves is that they should be useable. That is, the markets and
analysts need to accept that using such reserves to absorb write-offs when losses are high is
the natural counterpart of building them up when losses are cyclically low. It is not a sign of

BIS Review 145/2008

5

weakness or of inadequate capitalisation, but of prudent management of the cyclical pattern
of losses. From the point of view of market acceptability, separating cyclical reserves from
more structural capital requirements seems a valuable idea.
The second scheme I want to promote is growth-related capital requirements.
Losses tend to be lower in the early stages of a loan’s life than when it is fully seasoned
because borrowers are more certain of their own and the economy’s near-term prospects. A
loan book which is growing more rapidly than average will be weighted towards such
unseasoned loans, and so will appear to be performing better than a balanced portfolio of
loans of different vintages. In addition, rapid growth of lending tends itself to be associated
with taking on poor business – even if that is not obvious at the time it is written. Typically,
rapid growth can only be achieved by drawing in marginal borrowers to the market. That is
true of the banking sector as a whole. And when such growth is achieved by an individual
bank, over and above that achieved by its peers, adverse selection – attracting weaker
borrowers, who are unable to raise funds from other lenders – is an additional factor
depressing the quality of the loan book. The simple fact is that rapid absolute and relative
growth is strongly associated with poorer average loan quality and, sooner or later, sharply
higher non-performing loans.
The proposal is that, the risk weighting (and so, the capital requirement) of bank loans should
include a growth-based component. This could be linked either to the economy-wide growth
rate of a particular type of business, or to the growth rate of an individual bank’s lending
relative to the market as a whole; or some combination of the two. This would make it more
expensive for banks to expand their balance sheets faster that normal when confidence is
high and could be a useful means of dampening banks’ contribution to the business cycle.
The third, less direct, mechanism to discourage over-rapid expansion would be on the
liabilities side. Rapid balance sheet expansion tends to be fuelled by access to less stable
sources of funding, attracted perhaps by higher interest rates as the bank seeks to meet its
balance sheet aspirations (and feels able to pay, because – as already explained – loan loss
experience is good). Such funding could be treated as an added risk factor in assessing a
bank’s liquidity needs and those needs should be reflected in a requirement to hold high
quality liquid assets. So banks which are funding their expansion in this way will need to
match that expansion with an increasing stock of safer and lower-yielding assets. This will
tend to reduce their profit margins and so discourage rapid growth which is funded from less
stable sources.
Of course these outline proposals need a lot more work. Striking an appropriate balance
between the prudential objective of protecting the banks against the cycle and the
macroeconomic objective of dampening lending in the upswing will not be easy. And they are
never going to be the whole answer. The more we raise the cost of cost of increasing lending
by banks, the greater the incentive we will create for the growth of intermediation outside the
regulated banking sector or to foreign banks not subject to such counter-cyclical
requirements. Even if such unregulated competition had no consequences for banks
themselves, it could certainly undermine the desired counter-cyclical effects. And the
secondary banking crisis of the early 1970s is a reminder that we cannot anyway be relaxed
about changes in the scale of lending taking place outside the regulated sector.
Conclusion
To sum up, the last 15 months have brought home the costs of unbalanced growth in the
world economy. Although the correction started with a bursting property bubble in the US, it
has expanded into a global financial crisis and brought on recession throughout the
advanced economies and a sharp deceleration of growth elsewhere. The immediate priority
is to deal with this downswing. The extraordinary measures we have taken in this country
and others are having a positive impact but we may need to do more. We must also learn

6

BIS Review 145/2008

some lessons for policy in the medium term including the need for far better coordination of
policy internationally and the need for some new policy instruments alongside interest rates
to dampen the financial cycle.

Chart 1: GDP and employment

Source: ONS (including Labour Force Survey)

BIS Review 145/2008

Chart 2: House prices and earnings

Source: Halifax, Nationwide, ONS and Bank calculations

7

Chart 3: Major UK banks’ customer funding
gap, household saving ratio and foreign
interbank deposits

Source: Bank of England, Dealogic, ONS, published accounts
and Bank calculations.

Chart 4: CPI and households’ inflation
expectations for the year ahead (scaled to match
CPI on average)

Sources: The AlphaMonitor: consumer, YouGovAlpha, Bank of
England, Barclays Capital, Citigroup, GfK NOP, research carried
out by GfK NOP on behalf of the European Commission and
YouGov.

Chart 5: Sterling three-month interbank rates relative
to future expected policy rates

Chart 6: Oil prices

Sources: Bloomberg and Bank Calculations

Sources: Bloomberg and Thomson Datastream

8

BIS Review 145/2008

Chart 7: CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate expectations

BIS Review 145/2008

9

John Gieve: Economic prospects and the policy challenge
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Cityco Breakfast
Meeting, Manchester, 16 January 2009.
*

*

*

Introduction
One of the things that strikes me most on coming back to Manchester is the pace at which
the fabric of the city changes – and I was looking at this yesterday from up on the 23rd floor.
It’s not much more than two years since I was last here but in that time the city centre has
added about half a million square feet of retail space, more than 1½ million sq ft of new office
space and nearly 8000 extra hotel beds (a 40% increase).
All this development reflects the attractiveness of Manchester as a location for inward
investment and even more importantly the strong growth in businesses indigenous to the
city, many of which are represented today. But while I gather that nearly a million square feet
of office space has been let again in 2008 it is clear that in Manchester, as elsewhere, the
past year has been increasingly challenging for businesses of all types and the prospect is
forbidding.
The severity and nature of the challenges we face particularly in the banking sector makes it
very difficult to predict where we will be in a year from now. And the pace of change means
that it is even more true today than usual that we cannot rely for navigation on official
statistics alone. So as members of the Monetary Policy Committee we see it as more
important than ever to make visits such as this so that we can talk to businesses face to face
about the conditions they are experiencing on the ground. And every month our Agents in the
regions, including the North West, give us a comprehensive report based on a large number
of meetings with contacts in all sectors of the economy.
2009 is certain to be a difficult year for the UK and the global economy more generally. In the
United Kingdom, we expect the sharpest fall in output for decades while on some measures,
retail prices are likely to fall for the first time in almost half a century. We are not alone in our
difficulties. Most of our major trading partners are also entering recession. A decade or more
of remarkable macroeconomic stability; the Great Stability as economists called it, has come
to a shuddering halt.
These exceptional developments have led already to exceptional policy measures. Here in
the United Kingdom, the government has set in train a fiscal expansion and has stepped in to
support the banking system and lending. And earlier this month, we reduced official interest
rates to an historic low of 1.5%. Similar measures have been taken overseas.
My purpose today is to explain how this recession differs from the others I have lived
through, why that calls for a wider range of responses than normal, and the difference
between the policy objectives in the medium term and the short term.
The boom before the bust?
What is striking about the run-up to this recession is that we did not see the booms in output,
employment and wages that led to past recessions. Past recessions, in good measure,
reflected deliberate decisions by policymakers to rein in spending and damp the inflationary
pressures that had been building up. The rise in interest rates then led to a correction in the
spending behaviour of households and companies as optimism about future income growth
in the boom turned to uncertainty and gloom in the bust.
Chart 1 highlights what was happening to domestic output in the two years before the last
three recessions. The Barber Boom was a case in point, when output rose by 10% over the

BIS Review 5/2009

1

year to 1973 Q1, and then fell by 3% over the following year. You can see a similar pattern
before the recessions of the early 80s and early 90s. But in 2006 and early 2007 growth was
close to its average over the past 30 years.
That is not the whole story of course. When we look at asset markets, a different story
emerges. The credit boom may not have led to a rapid inflation in the price of goods and
services, but it did support a surge in the price of a broad range of assets. Property prices
soared (Chart 2). The price of stocks and bonds also rebounded strongly from their early
decade lows.
That rise in prices was driven by and reflected in a sustained rise in borrowing. A
combination of factors – including a large flow of savings out of the emerging economies,
and a reduction in the return that investors required to bear risk – had allowed the banks to
raise large sums of money at a very low price. And, as memories of earlier busts faded, the
margin that banks charged their customers over those lower funding costs was also
compressed by increased competition.
Households and companies were therefore able to borrow more money at ever more
attractive terms. Loan to income ratios crept up. And UK banks became increasingly
dependent on borrowing from wholesale investors overseas (Chart 3). By the eve of the
Credit Crunch in 2007, the balance sheets of the banks and households and some
companies to whom they had lent large sums of money had become stretched.
All this looked sustainable so long as banks could continue to get access to cheap funds,
and households and companies could rely on a steady stream of income and profit to service
debt. But once the music stopped, those leveraged balance sheets were very vulnerable and
adjusting them is proving very painful. That process is at the heart of the events unfolding
here in the UK and around the world.
But the crisis here was not triggered by rising household defaults or corporate failures in the
UK; in fact they have started to rise only recently. The crisis started in the US housing market
and spread to the rest of the world through the banking system. And the problems in the US
were themselves a reflection of global imbalances in trade and capital flows between
advanced and emerging economies. The rapid growth of exports from Asia, and latterly the
Gulf, was reflected in a substantial build up of savings which financed a rapid growth of credit
in the West.
When losses emerged in US sub-prime market, they ricocheted through the international
financial system, including British banks. Not only did they face losses on their portfolios of
structured credit but sources of funding on which they had become dependent, particularly
securitisation, dried up.
A global economic slowdown
Initially, the impact of the crisis seemed to be concentrated in the US and a handful of
European banks while the emerging economies of Asia continued to boom. With wages and
prices rising, many of the people I met in India and China this time last year rather welcomed
the prospect of a fall in Western demand as a means of taking a little of the heat out of their
own economies. But the picture has changed since then.
In the UK we have experienced a sharp and broad-based slowdown in activity that gathered
momentum in the autumn (Chart 4). In part that reflected the concerted credit squeeze that
started in summer 2007. But we also saw a sharp drop in confidence among consumers and
companies after the crisis in the banking system which followed the decision to allow
Lehman Brothers to fail in September last year.
A similar drop in confidence has been observed across the world – in China and India as
much as in the West – and we are now in the throes of a severe and coordinated contraction
worldwide (Chart 5). Even those countries which sat out the excesses of the credit boom

2

BIS Review 5/2009

have been affected by the slowdown. Around the globe, sectors like manufacturing which are
heavily dependent on world trade have been particularly badly hit by the ebb tide of global
demand. In the United States, the ISM survey of manufacturing activity posted a near thirty
year low in December. And in Japan, the November fall in industrial production was the
largest percentage contraction on record. The recent industrial production figures from
Germany, France and Italy tell a similar story.
The outlook for the remainder of 2009
The immediate prospects in the UK, as elsewhere, remain difficult. Data on new orders
suggest that output is likely to fall sharply in the first quarter of 2009 as well as in Q4 of last
year; further declines in output, if not at the same pace, are likely beyond then.
The widening margin of spare capacity will act as a significant drag on costs and prices.
Coupled with the deflationary impact of falling commodity prices and the cut in VAT, CPI
inflation will continue falling over the year and may go well below the target rate of 2%
despite the impact of sterling’s depreciation on import prices. With its inclusion of mortgage
interest and other housing costs, the change in the RPI is expected to turn negative.
The downturn itself has set powerful contractionary forces to work.
Over-indebted households and companies will be pulling back on spending to try and pay
down those debts. Although the recent falls in commodity prices will help to mitigate some of
the downward pressure on household income, rising unemployment is not only constraining
the spending of those losing or not finding jobs but is likely to boost precautionary saving
across the household sector. And falling property prices are reducing activity in the housing
market and the construction sector.
With credit hard to come by, companies will find it difficult to fund new investment projects
and few companies would be likely to invest large sums of money even if they could raise the
funds. Commercial property prices are still falling rapidly. More generally, the uncertainty
over the depth and duration of the recession discourages investment and puts cash flow at a
premium. There is every incentive for companies to batten down the hatches. Unsurprisingly
then, investment intentions have fallen sharply (Chart 6).
The stock cycle is also depressing output. Stocks initially rise as sales falter and those stocks
of inputs, work-in-progress and finished output that companies have become more difficult
and expensive to finance. But running stocks down involves sharp cuts in production as we
are seeing in the motor industry.
All these forces develop in any recession. The special features of this one are its global
reach, so the contraction at home is compounded by falling demand for exports, and the
severity of the pressures on the banks many of whose survival has been at risk. They too
face funding and capital pressures to shrink their balance sheets even if it means turning
away good business. Successive credit surveys show not just a reduction in demand but a
growing constraint on supply. Not only have spreads increased but there is clear evidence of
quantity rationing in some markets which is compounding the normal contraction in
investment and the squeeze on working capital.
I should add that that does not mean that all banks have stopped lending. They have not. As
Chart 7 shows, in the housing market for example there is a clear difference between the
biggest UK banks and the rest; we saw a big increase in lending especially by foreign banks
in the years 2006 and 2007; many of them have now withdrawn from the market. On top of
that, of course Northern Rock and Bradford and Bingley have largely ceased new lending. As
a result the continued lending of the main banks – and some smaller banks and building
societies – is offset by reductions elsewhere. What matters for the economy as a whole of
course is the total flow of credit.

BIS Review 5/2009

3

The policy challenge
Nearly all economic policy decisions work with a lag. So there is a limited amount we can do
at this point to influence the path of output in the first half of this year (although there may be
ways of mitigating the costs). The main challenge now is to prevent a deep recession being
unnecessarily prolonged. I want to conclude by making three points about that challenge.
First, the full impact of the measures of the last few months have yet to be felt. In the UK, the
Bank has cut interest rates from 5% to 1.5% since October, the government has cut taxes
and expanded spending and the banking system has been supported through
recapitalisation and improved access to funding and liquidity. These measures will have a
growing effect, even if we do nothing more. While the transmission mechanism from official
interest rates to the economy has been impaired by the dislocation of financial markets, the
cuts in interest rates are still having an impact. While the reductions in the income of savers
have offset to some extent the benefits to borrowers in the household sector, the net gain to
the company sector is clear.
The changes in interest rates have also accounted in part for the depreciation in the sterling
exchange rate, which is down around a fifth in the past six months. No one who has lived
through the 70s, 80s and early 90s will be complacent about a fall in sterling. But there is no
doubt that an appreciable fall in the pound, such as we have seen, has been helpful both in
supporting exports and import substitution in the short term and in encouraging the
rebalancing of the economy that we need in the medium term.
My second point is that it is important to distinguish the medium term from the short term
goals. In the medium term we need to see a rebalancing of the economy in the UK, and
some other countries, with a higher savings rates, less leverage in the financial sector, and
higher net exports. However if everyone tries to increase saving and cut borrowing
immediately we could prolong the downturn painfully. If everyone plans for the worst, we are
more likely to get it. That is why economists sometimes sound a bit like St Augustine who
famously noted in his confessions “Make me chaste and continent, but not yet”.
This apparent tension between the medium term and the short term is evident in the banking
sector. One lesson of the last 18 months has been that in the medium term banks need to
work with lower leverage and higher buffers of capital and liquidity. I have argued elsewhere
that we need in future to relate these buffers to the state of the economic and financial cycle
so that they expand in good times and are sufficient to cover the inevitable losses in bad
times. In a sense the purpose of the recapitalisation in October was to put banks capital up to
the level it should have been had such counter cyclical measures been in place. But, at the
moment we are in the downswing and we need to allow the banks to use those cushions and
reduce their capital ratios from the new and higher starting point.
The third point I want to make is about the breadth of the policy response. Long experience
has shown that interest rates are the most powerful and effective instrument for managing
the economy. As a result other regulatory and fiscal measures have taken a back seat in
macroeconomic management in the last 15 years.
However the distinguishing feature of this recession is that it is centred on the banking
system, which is at the heart of the allocation of resources through the economy and of the
transmission mechanism for monetary policy. It is no surprise therefore that both in this
country and elsewhere interest rates have been supplemented by measures that have
directly focussed on banking and financial markets.
Credit is a critical lubricant in a modern economy. It can bridge the gap between expenditure
and income. It supports investment: allowing households and companies to bring forward the
purchase of expensive assets, which would otherwise require an extended period of saving.
And it allows spending to be smoothed in the face of unexpected shocks to income.
As credit became more scarce, the economy was bound to slow, amplifying the slowdown in
the real economy that was already in train. A feedback loop started to gather momentum.

4

BIS Review 5/2009

The more the banks reined in lending, the worse the economic outlook became, and the
greater spectre of rising credit losses on the banks’ loan portfolios, encouraging further cuts
in lending.
Policymakers had to intervene to cut this feedback, to prevent funding markets for banks and
industry from freezing up, and to ensure that the banks have the capital, the funds and the
confidence to continue lending.
The measures taken in October were successful in preventing a systemic collapse and in the
first week of the New Year there were some signs of a more general easing of pressures in
financial markets. However there have been many relapses in the last 18 months and
yesterday we again saw renewed fears in the markets.
On the policy side, it is worth remembering that it is possible to overdo the degree of support.
But at present the risks remain clearly to the down side. Therefore, in setting policy, the
authorities both here and overseas need to consider whether further action on interest rates
(or other monetary measures) or fiscal action is required. They need also to consider
whether to do more to underpin the confidence among banks and among investors that is
necessary to support the lending the economy needs to emerge from recession.

Chart 1: Annual GDP growth
percentage changes on a year earlier
12
10
Average annual
grow th since 1970

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

1970

1975

BIS Review 5/2009

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

5

Chart 2: Property prices
Indices: March 2003 = 100
150
Rat io of house prices t o
earnings

140
130
120
110
100
90
80

Rat io of commercial property
prices t o PNFCs profit s

70
60
50

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Chart 3: Customer funding gap

Chart 4: Survey measures of activity
£ billions

Ratio

Cust omer funding gap (RHS)
Int erbank deposits from abroad (RHS)
Household saving rat io(b)(LHS)

8
7

5

500

4

400

3

300

2

200

1

100
0
02

03

04

05

06

07

08

Expansion

Indices: 50 = output
unchanged on a month ago
70

700
600

0

6

800

6

01

08

60

50

Construction
Services

40
Contraction

Manufacturing

30

97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08

BIS Review 5/2009

Chart 5: Global output

Chart 6: Investment intentions
65

Global output balance

August 2008
60

Services
Manufacturing

Balance reporting an
upwards revision to
40

55

30

50

20

45

10
+
0
10

UK CIPS output
40
35

20

30
2006

2007

2008

30
88 90 92

94 96 98 00

02 04 06 08

Chart 7: Growth in secured lending
3m annualised growth rates (nsa)

Other lenders
Major lenders

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10
2003

BIS Review 5/2009

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

7

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the CBI Dinner,
Nottingham, 20 January 2009.
*

*

*

Certain truths are self-evident. One is that financial markets and the economic outlook can
change quickly and in surprising ways. You in the Nottingham business community know that
only too well. In line with businesses across the United Kingdom, your economic fortunes
have changed markedly over four months.
Before last September, the world economy was slowing and at home the Monetary Policy
Committee published a central projection of falling output in the United Kingdom in the third
quarter. Inflation, though, was still rising. But after the failure of the American investment
bank Lehman Brothers, there was a widespread collapse of confidence in the banking
systems of the industrialised world. That led to an unprecedented and synchronised
downturn in business and consumer confidence around the world. Our business contacts at
home and abroad, and my international counterparts, started to report that orders and
confidence had, in the same telling phrase, “fallen off a cliff”.
Global equity prices fell more in the month following the failure of Lehman Brothers than in
any but a handful of months in the Bank of England’s 300 year history. Chinese electricity
production, having risen steadily at 15% a year, fell in November to a level 8% lower than a
year earlier – the steepest fall on record. Car sales in Brazil contracted by a quarter
compared to a year earlier. In Japan, industrial production fell by 8.5% in just one month in
November, and in Germany, the value of exports declined by over 10%. In the United States,
over a million jobs were lost in the final two months of last year – the fastest rate of job
losses in over 60 years. And in the United Kingdom, manufacturing output contracted at its
fastest rate since 1980. Trade was badly affected – the Baltic Dry Index, an indicator of
demand to ship materials around the world – fell at the fastest pace on record in October. For
the world economy as a whole, consensus forecasts of growth in 2009 have been revised
down from 3% to just 1% since September.1

1

See charts below.
Sources:
Chart 1: Composite indices from Global Financial Database, comprising of: East Indies share for 1693; Bank
of England and East Indies shares from 1694 to August 1711; Bank of England, East Indies and South Sea
shares from September 1711 to January 1811; Rostow's Total Index of Share Prices from 1811 to 1867; the
London and Cambridge Economic Service Index from 1867 to 1906; The Banker's Magazine Index from 1907
to May 1933; the Actuaries General Index from June 1933 to April 1962; and the FTSE All-Share from April
1962 onwards. Data are monthly until 1965, then weekly until 1968, and daily afterwards.
Chart 2: National Bureau of Statistics, China
Chart 3: Associação Nacional dos Fabricantes de Veículos Automotores, Brazil
Chart 4: Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Japan
Chart 5: Bundesbank, Germany
Chart 6: Bureau of Labor Statistics, US
Chart 7: ONS
Chart 8: Baltic Exchange
Chart 9: Consensus Economics and Bank calculations

BIS Review 8/2009

1

Governments and central banks around the world responded decisively and boldly with large
fiscal injections and cuts in interest rates, and the provision of hundreds of billions of pounds
in capital and funding to support banks. The scale and urgency of their actions embodied an
audacity born out of pessimism.
Tonight I want to ask: what went wrong? How can we limit the impact of the banking crisis on
the wider economy? And can we design a better approach to the management of our
economy and financial system in the future?
So what went wrong? The origins of the crisis lie in the imbalances in the world economy
which built up over a decade or more. The entry of the rapidly growing economies in Asia
into the world trading and financial systems provided a huge new pool of savings. But their
development and exchange rate strategies meant that they were running large current
account surpluses. In other words, their domestic saving was more than enough to finance
investment at home. Significant amounts were channelled into foreign financial assets.
Equally, the policies of the industrialised countries were aimed at ensuring a sufficient level
of total demand to maintain stable inflation, and so desired levels of output and employment.
That required policies to stimulate domestic demand and current account deficits to offset the
surpluses elsewhere. The perverse result was huge flows of capital from the poorer
developing economies to the richer mature economies.
Large amounts of savings flowing into global financial markets would by themselves have
pushed down real interest rates. That, together with the success of central banks in the
industrialised world in maintaining low and stable inflation – something that they had not
been able to do in the preceding three decades – meant that nominal interest rates fell even
further. As a result, nominal risk free returns fell to levels not seen in a generation.
The combination of a fall in risk-free returns, and large amounts of capital looking for a home
in western capital markets, created a demand for assets offering higher returns – the socalled search for yield. Investors, including banks, overlooked the fact that higher returns
could be generated only by taking higher risks. As a result, money was lent on easier terms.
That helped to push up further asset prices that had already risen as real interest rates were
falling.
It also led to an explosion in the size of the financial sector as new instruments were created
to satisfy the search for yield. As well as lending to households and businesses, banks lent to
other banks which bought ever more exotic instruments created by the financial system itself.
The effect was to replicate the original risky loans many times over. Over the past five years,
the balance sheets of many of the world’s largest banks more than doubled.
From the early 1990s to the start of the financial turmoil in 2007, total debt in the UK relative
to GDP almost doubled. Around two-thirds of the increase in total debt was accounted for by
lending to the financial sector. A marked expansion in debt of the financial sector also
occurred in the United States and the euro area.
The Bank did not stand idly by during this period. The Monetary Policy Committee set Bank
Rate to achieve the inflation target. Monetary policy – here and in our major partners – was
successful in controlling inflation and maintaining economic stability. From the early 1990s
until the onset of financial turmoil in 2007, output growth, both here and in the industrialised
world in general, was close to its long-run average. Moreover, through our regular
publications and speeches on financial stability the Bank highlighted the dangers posed by
the growth in the size and complexity of the financial sector. Nevertheless, it is clear that
policy did not succeed in preventing the development of an unsustainable position.
Some have suggested as a result that Bank Rate be directed not only at meeting the inflation
target but also at preventing excessive increases in debt and asset prices. Leaving to one
side the feasibility of targeting the latter, the obvious question is how one can meet two
objectives with one instrument. The answer of course is by accepting a trade-off between the
two objectives. But why should we accept unemployment or high inflation in order to reduce

2

BIS Review 8/2009

financial imbalances? It would be more sensible to use Bank Rate for its traditional task of
targeting inflation to maintain a balance between demand and supply in the economy, and to
create a new instrument to limit the build up of debt.
What is required is an additional policy instrument to stabilise the growth of the financial
sector balance sheet. There is an active international debate as to the optimal design of such
an instrument, but one way or another it must provide incentives for banks to reduce the
volatility of their balance sheet.
It is also clear that at the heart of the crisis was the problem identified but not solved at
Bretton Woods – the need to impose symmetric obligations on countries that run persistent
current account surpluses and not just on countries that run deficits. From that failure
stemmed a chain of events, no one of which alone appeared to threaten stability, but which
taken together led to the worst financial crisis any of us can recall. For several years the
Bank of England and other UK participants in the international fora argued for a major reform
of the international monetary system and the IMF in order to address this issue.
The gravity of the present crisis demonstrates the urgency of rectifying both of these
deficiencies.
In the past year the true scale of the risks taken by financial institutions has become painfully
apparent. As losses mount it has become obvious that banks did not have sufficient capital to
support their inflated balance sheets. Questions about the adequacy of liquidity have turned
into questions about solvency. In response, banks have been trying to raise new capital and
shrink their balance sheets. The banking system is in the throes of a difficult and prolonged
adjustment to much smaller balance sheets relative to their equity capital – or leverage, as it
is known. Leverage ratios of large banks remain at remarkably high levels, and the required
adjustment will not happen quickly.
I know that bankers around the world realise this. The incentives they face to adjust, in
whatever way they can, are now overwhelming. With fresh capital from the private sector
difficult to obtain, banks have opted to reduce their lending and that is why the flow of credit
to all parts of the economy, here and abroad, has been heavily disrupted. And the credit that
is still flowing is available only on materially tighter terms and conditions. But the fact that
much of the increase in debt occurred within the financial sector means that the necessary
unwinding of balance sheets could and should take place primarily within the financial sector.
That is why the Bank of England has been monitoring carefully the lending by banks to the
non-financial sector – businesses and households – and why the lending agreements
announced yesterday which will be negotiated between Government and individual banks
will focus on lending to those sectors. There is scope for a reduction in the leverage of banks
without restricting lending to the “real” economy. But to bring that about much of the
necessary “netting” of exposures would be cross-border, demonstrating that almost every
aspect of the present crisis has an international dimension.
What is the appropriate policy response in present circumstances? Some say that because
the massive increase in indebtedness contributed to the crisis the right response is to save
and repay debt. Others argue that the only way out of our present difficulties is to borrow and
spend more. Who is right?
Both are – up to a point. We cannot avoid the necessary long-term adjustment. To pretend
otherwise would only store up problems for the future. But we can try to slow the pace of the
adjustment to domestic demand in order to limit its impact on output and employment. So we
need to take actions now that will dampen the adjustment in the short term while recognising
that the adjustment will ultimately need to be made. This is the paradox of policy at present –
almost any policy measure that is desirable now appears diametrically opposite to the
direction in which we need to go in the long term. Spending now supports the economy, but
in the long run we need to save more and borrow less. Public borrowing sustains spending,
but in the long run needs to fall. Banks are encouraged to run down their capital to enable
them to absorb losses while continuing to lend, but in the long run they will need more

BIS Review 8/2009

3

capital. Interest rates have fallen to unprecedented levels, but in the long run will need to rise
to more normal levels.
In each area of policy it is important that there is a clear framework which guides both the
short-term response to the current downturn and the exit strategy when normal conditions
return. For monetary policy, the inflation target is that framework. Bank Rate is set to meet
our target of 2% for the twelve-month rate of consumer price inflation.
For a decade inflation and Bank Rate were remarkably stable. But in only four months, the
MPC has cut Bank Rate by 3½ percentage points to its lowest ever level of 1½%. Does this
mean we have changed our target? No. We have taken those actions precisely because the
sudden downturn in the world and UK economies created a significant risk that inflation
would fall below the 2% target.
Despite those big cuts, there remains a risk that inflation will fall below 2%. The disruption to
the banking system has impaired the effectiveness of our conventional interest rate
instrument. And with Bank Rate already at its lowest level in the Bank’s history, it is sensible
for the MPC to prepare for the possibility – and I stress that we are not there yet – that it may
need to move beyond the conventional instrument of Bank Rate and consider a range of
unconventional measures. They would take the form of purchases by the Bank of England of
a range of financial assets in order to expand the amount of reserves held by commercial
banks and to increase the availability of credit to companies. That should encourage the
banking system to expand the supply of broad money by lending to the private sector and
also help companies to raise finance from capital markets.
The conventional approach to such unconventional measures is to buy assets, such as
government securities or gilts, which are traded in liquid markets to boost the supply of
money. Provided the additional reserves are not simply hoarded by banks, as happened to
some extent in Japan earlier in this decade, such asset purchases can increase the supply of
broad money and credit and the liquidity of private sector portfolios, raising spending. The
effectiveness of this approach is likely to be enhanced by the clear commitment by the MPC
to take the measures necessary to meet the inflation target in the medium term.
In addition to these conventional unconventional measures there are also unconventional
unconventional measures. When credit markets are dysfunctional, as some are at present,
targeted purchases by the Bank of England of assets may improve liquidity in markets for
those credit instruments. The objective of such purchases would be not only to boost the
supply of broad money but also to increase liquidity and trading activity in the markets for
those assets. A reduction in the illiquidity premium for a particular credit instrument might
help to stimulate issuance by corporate borrowers and the resumption of capital market
flows, thus reducing reliance on bank lending. It could also raise the values of assets that are
currently under-priced because of high illiquidity premia, helping to strengthen the balance
sheets of banks and other financial institutions.
Yesterday the Government authorised the Bank of England to conduct such operations,
financed by the issue of Treasury Bills, in order to improve the flow of credit to companies.
But at some point the Monetary Policy Committee might wish to adopt these unconventional
measures as an instrument of monetary policy.
In conducting such operations, it is important to choose the markets in which to intervene
extremely carefully. There is a fine dividing line between helping to oil the wheels in markets
which are temporarily impaired, and artificially supporting markets in which there is no
underlying demand. That is why, as Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke said in London last
week, central banks will look to intervene only in markets that “normally play major roles” in
the functioning of the financial system. Therefore, the Bank will need to be satisfied that there
is a genuine private demand for an asset in normal conditions before it would be eligible for
the asset purchase facility. We are aiming to complement and stimulate private demand, not
substitute for it.

4

BIS Review 8/2009

The Bank is actively considering in which markets targeted purchases might stimulate new
issuance. One example is the corporate bond market. Spreads on high quality corporate
bonds have more than doubled since early September to an average of over 5 percentage
points. Despite innovation in financial markets this is the highest spread since the mid-1970s.
The Bank estimates that a significant element of this spread represents an illiquidity premium
which could be reduced somewhat by increasing activity and liquidity in the market.
Commercial paper is another case where purchases might help, although that market is
considerably smaller in the United Kingdom than in the United States. In each case the Bank
will keep the market fully informed, and more details will be published at the end of the
month. It will be a matter of weeks not days before a programme of purchases can begin, but
it will be weeks not months.
There is another reason to tread carefully. Such asset purchases involve taking more credit
risk onto the public sector balance sheet. That is why the Bank will consider purchasing only
high quality assets.
Despite the existence of a range of unconventional instruments, monetary policy is likely to
be more effective when the banking system is working normally. So the first priority for policy
is to fix the banking system so that it can resume its normal lending function. The contraction
of lending to ordinary viable businesses – your businesses – is threatening to drive the
economy further into recession. The package of measures announced yesterday by the
Chancellor are not designed to protect the banks as such. They are designed to protect the
economy from the banks. In particular, the Asset Protection Scheme aims to remove a
degree of uncertainty about the future losses banks will make. It also has the effect of
reducing the amount of capital banks need to hold against their risky assets. Both effects will
serve to strengthen and underpin banks' balance sheets and so support their lending to the
real economy. To be clear, the scheme does not mean that the taxpayer will bear the full
brunt of past lending mistakes by banks. Rather, there is sharing of losses between
shareholders and the government – or coinsurance – with the government providing, at a
price, insurance against only extreme outcomes for the banks. That can be to the advantage
of all of us if banks help to underwrite the economy through the agreed lending targets and
government underwrites the balance sheet of the banks. The insurance policy will be most
cost-effective for taxpayers if all the major lenders sign up to lending targets.
Nevertheless, the problems in the financial sector mean that 2009 will be a difficult year for
all of us. A pronounced contraction in spending and output is underway. As expected, output
in the UK economy fell in the third quarter of 2008, but the downward momentum intensified
in the fourth quarter. Manufacturing output is falling, and the key service sector surveys have
reached record low levels in recent months. Total output in the fourth quarter is expected to
have fallen sharply. In the first half of this year, the rate of contraction is likely to continue to
be marked, and our trading partners are experiencing similar problems.
But the very significant policy actions taken in recent months will eventually stimulate a
recovery in demand, output and employment. Bank Rate has fallen from 5% to 1½%. And, as
I have explained, the Monetary Policy Committee has a range of options to stimulate the
economy further if required. Fiscal policy has been eased. The banking system is receiving
massive support to cope with the need to restructure its balance sheet. That will take time,
but time is a great healer, even of banks. Since the summer, the exchange rate has fallen by
almost 20%; and oil prices have fallen by around two-thirds, both of which will boost demand.
No one can know at what point the impact of all this stimulus will have a visible effect on
activity; the lags in economic policy are notoriously long and unpredictable. But welldesigned policies implemented within a consistent policy framework will eventually work.

BIS Review 8/2009

5

1. Ten largest monthly falls in UK equity prices

Percentage change on a year earlier

South Sea

Aug-Sep 1720

Black Monday

Oct-Nov 1987

South Sea

Sep-Oct 1720

10 Se p-10 O ct 2008

10 Sep-10 Oct 2008

Oil shock & secondary bank crisis

Nov-Dec 1973

Oil shock & secondary bank crisis

Jul-Aug 1974

France fall to Germany

Jun-Jul 1940

Oil shock & secondary bank crisis

Feb-Mar 1974

Unexpected rate hike

Aug-Sep 1981

Oil shock & secondary bank crisis

Nov-Dec 1974

2. Chinese electricity production
30
20
10
0
September
2008

-20
Jan 01

-60

-40
-20
Percent change

Jan 03

Jan 05

4. Japanese industrial production

Percentage change on a year earlier

September 2008

Percentage change on a month earlier

40

2

20

0

10

-2

0

-4

-10

-6
September
2008

-30
Jan 07

Jul 07

Jan 08

Jul 08

Jan 01

5. German export values

September
2008

6

Jan 03

Jan 05

Jan 03

Jan 05

-8
-10

Jan 07

6. US Non-farm payrolls

Percentage change on a month earlier

Jan 01

4

30

-20

Jul 06

Jan 07

0

3. Brazilian car sales

Jan 06

-10

Jan 07

two monthly change, thousands

8

1000

4

500

0

0

-4

-500

-8

September
2008

-12

Jan 01

Jan 03

Jan 05

Jan 07

BIS Review 8/2009

-1000
-1500

7. UK manufacturing output

8. Baltic dry index (monthly averages)

Percentage change, latest three months on
previous three months

Percentage change on a month earlier

3

80

2

60

1

40
20

0

0

-1

-20

-2
September
2008
Jan 01

Jan 03

Jan 05

-40
September
2008

-3
-4

Jan 07

Jan 01

Jan 03

Jan 05

Jan 07

-60
-80
Jan 09

9. Consensus forecast for world growth
forecast for 2009 calendar year growth

September 2008

Jan-08

M ar-08

M ay-08

Jul-08

Sep-08

5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0

Nov-08

Survey dates

BIS Review 8/2009

7

Andrew G Haldane: Why banks failed the stress test
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at
the Marcus-Evans Conference on Stress-Testing, London, 9-10 February 2009.
I would like to thank Geoff Coppins, Harry Goodacre, Nigel Jenkinson, Salina Ladha, Iman van Leyveld, Jack
McKeown, Joe Noss, Adrian Penalver, Nick Vause and Matthew Willison for contributions and comments.

*

*

*

By any historical standard, the financial crisis of the past 18 months has been extraordinary.
Some have suggested it is the worst since the early 1970s; others, the worst since the Great
Depression; others still, the worst in human history. Time will tell.
Risk managers are of course known for their pessimistic streak. Back in August 2007, the
Chief Financial Officer of Goldman Sachs, David Viniar, commented to the Financial Times:
“We are seeing things that were 25-standard deviation moves, several days in a row”
To provide some context, assuming a normal distribution, a 7.26-sigma daily loss would be
expected to occur once every 13.7 billion or so years. That is roughly the estimated age of
the universe.
A 25-sigma event would be expected to occur once every 6 x 10124 lives of the universe. That
is quite a lot of human histories. When I tried to calculate the probability of a 25-sigma event
occurring on several successive days, the lights visibly dimmed over London and, in a scene
reminiscent of that Little Britain sketch, the computer said “No”. Suffice to say, time is very
unlikely to tell whether Mr Viniar’s empirical observation proves correct.
Fortunately, there is a simpler explanation – the model was wrong. Of course, all models are
wrong. The only model that is not wrong is reality and reality is not, by definition, a model.
But risk management models have during this crisis proved themselves wrong in a more
fundamental sense. They failed Keynes’ test – that it is better to be roughly right than
precisely wrong. With hindsight, these models were both very precise and very wrong.
For that reason, 2008 might well be remembered as the year stress-testing failed. Failed
those institutions who invested in it in the hope it would transform their management of risk.
Failed the authorities who had relied – perhaps over-relied – on the signal it provided about
financial firms’ risk management capabilities. And, perhaps most important of all, failed the
financial system as a whole by contributing, first, to the decade of credit boom and, latterly,
the credit bust.
That is a stark conclusion. But it is a conclusion which is hard to escape. When tested
against real stress, large parts of the financial system seized-up and a number of financial
institutions failed. Against that backdrop, now is as good a time as any for candour about
what went wrong. That is the purpose of my comments today: to diagnose some of market
failures or frictions in stress-testing practices highlighted by the crisis; and, more
speculatively, to suggest some practical ways in which stress-testing might deliver answers
which are “roughly right”.
The Golden Decade
To understand the recent failures in risk management, some history is instructive. Prior to the
current financial crisis, the previous two low tide marks for the financial system and risk
management were the stock market crash of October 1987 and the failure of the hedge fund
LTCM in September 1998. Both prompted a sea-change in risk management practices and
technologies.

BIS Review 18/2009

1

The October 1987 crash in many respects marked the birth of Value at Risk (VaR) as a key
risk management tool in financial firms. By 1989, Dennis Weatherstone, JP Morgan’s thenchairman, called for a “4:15 Report”, which combined all of the firm’s data on market risk in
one place. That report should contain information sufficient to answer the question “How
much could JPM lose if tomorrow turns out to be a relatively bad day?”
With this as the top-down edict, it is perhaps unsurprising that JP Morgan were an earlydeveloper and early-adopter of VaR. By 1996, they had published their methodology and the
detail of the parameterisation of their risk models. In 1998 RiskMetrics Group, an
independent for-profit business, spun off the JP Morgan methodology and began offering
consultancy services to the risk management community. And from 1997 onwards, VaR
came to take a degree of prominence within the regulatory community, with first the US SEC
and subsequently the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) giving further
impetus to VaR, including through the design and implementation of Basel II.
By 2006, when Philippe Jorion published his famous textbook on VaR, relatively few would
have disputed the claim in its title – “Value at Risk: The New Benchmark for Managing
Financial Risk”. The message was clear: the technological frontier of risk management had
been shifted outwards decisively. A cursory search suggests that there have been more than
200 books published on VaR since the October 1987 crash, or roughly one a month.
The date of birth of stress-testing is harder to trace. Early mention is made of it in a technical
note by RiskMetrics in 1996. But it is clear that stress-testing was given considerable impetus
by the failure of LTCM more than a decade after the October 1987 crash. Unlike VaR, which
had private sector origins, the official sector appears to have been at least as much a driver
behind the adoption of stress-testing. By 2001, under the auspices of its Financial Sector
Assessment Programme (FSAP), the IMF was publishing details of its stress-testing
methodology and experience. Today, the same cursory search reveals over 250 articles on
stress-testing in the past ten years, or more than one a fortnight. We were experiencing a
second wave of technological revolution in risk management.
This technological transformation contributed to what was, with hindsight, an extraordinary
period of growth and success for the financial system and financial markets – a Golden
Decade. Between October 1998 and June 2007, banks’ share prices increased almost 60%
and their balance sheets rose more than threefold. In some markets growth was little short of
explosive, with the rise in volumes outstanding in the CDS market making Moore’s Law look
positively sluggish.
And why was this credit boom not destined to end in bust? Because this time was different.
At the same time as returns were being boosted by bigger balance sheets and financed by
higher leverage, risk was being held in check by a shift in the technological frontier of risk
management. A new era had dawned, one with simultaneously higher return and lower risk.
This miracle came care of a compelling combination of cavalier risk-takers and roundhead
risk-managers. Or so ran the rhetoric.
With hindsight, this Golden Decade and its aftermath has all the hallmarks of, in Charles
Kindleberger’s words, Manias, Panics and Crashes. Enthusiasm about return gave way to
hubris and a collective blind eye was turned to the resulting risk. This was a latter-day
version of the Hans Christian Andersen fairy-tale, “The Emperor’s New Clothes”. In a classic
collective delusion, the Emperor’s new clothes, you will recall, were admired by all.
Conferences like this one became catwalks for banks and the authorities alike, parading their
new garments through the streets in all their finery. Risk modelling became high fashion for
the pointy-heads, haute-couture for the anoraks.
The past two years have rather changed all that. The sub-prime market has played the role
of the child in the fairytale, naively but honestly shifting everyone’s perceptions about how
threadbare the financial system had become. The madness of crowds, as Charles Mackay
so vividly put it, became visible to all. The resulting unravelling of the Golden Decade has
been little short of remarkable.

2

BIS Review 18/2009

Asset prices have collapsed – for example, world equity prices have lost more than threequarters of their gains during the Golden Decade. Prices of banks’ shares have fared even
worse, losing almost 60% of their value and are now lower than at the start of the Golden
Decade. In the face of these falls, risk management systems across virtually all institutions
have been found badly wanting. A survey of 500 risk managers by KPMG in October last
year found that 92% intended to review their risk management practices.
Estimated losses within the financial sector since the start of the crisis lie anywhere between
a large number and an unthinkably large one. Today, managers of risk – the authorities just
as much as banks – find themselves struggling to preserve their dignity, with risk
management systems a combination of sack-cloth and fig-leaf. This year, stress-testing
conferences like this one are more doghouse than catwalk.
Diagnosing the market failures
So what were the failures, specifically of stress-testing and other risk management tools, that
contributed to this credit boom and subsequent bust? It is useful to try and identify the microeconomic friction – the market failure – that was the root cause of these risk management
problems. Doing so better enables both financial institutions and the authorities to pinpoint
what needs to change and how. These market failures fall roughly into three categories:
•

disaster myopia;

•

network externalities; and

•

misaligned incentives.

All three have impeccable microeconomic
macroeconomic consequences.

credentials

and

potentially

disastrous

Disaster myopia
In a nutshell, disaster myopia refers to agents’ propensity to underestimate the probability of
adverse outcomes, in particular small probability events from the distant past. That makes it
sound like a rather unworthy informational failure. In fact, it is well-established in cognitive
psychology that economic agents have a tendency to base decision rules around rough
heuristics or rules of thumb. 1 The longer the period since an event occurred, the lower the
subjective probability attached to it by agents (the so-called “availability heuristic”). And
below a certain bound, this subjective probability will effectively be set at zero (the “threshold
heuristic”).
If the period of stability is sufficiently long – a Golden Decade perhaps? – this subjective
approach to evaluating probabilities looks increasingly like a fully-rational, Bayesian
approach to updating probabilities. As time passes, convincing the crowds that you are not
naked becomes progressively easier. It is perhaps no coincidence that the last three truly
systemic crises – October 1987, August 1998, and the credit crunch which commenced in
2007 – were roughly separated by a decade. Perhaps ten years is the threshold heuristic for
risk managers.
Models of disaster myopia have been used to explain a number of phenomena, including the
tendency for drivers to slow down having witnessed an accident and then speed up once the
accident has become more distant in their memory, and for people to under-insure against
low frequency natural hazards such as earthquakes and floods. In the context of financial
crises, disaster myopia has been used to explain the LDC debt crisis, the US savings and

1

For example, Kahneman, Slovic and Tversky (1982).

BIS Review 18/2009

3

loans debacle and various commercial property crises. 2 The credit crunch of the past 18
months is but the latest in a long line of myopia-induced disasters.
Such disaster myopia is not of course confined to the private sector. The official sector is just
as likely to succumb to cognitive biases borne of long periods of stability. With hindsight, the
stress-tests required by the authorities over the past few years were too heavily influenced
by behaviour during the Golden Decade. Many risk management models developed within
the private sector during the Golden Decade were, in effect, pre-programmed to induce
disaster myopia. These models were often data hungry. Improvements in data and IT
technology were able to feed these beasts with vast, high-frequency datasets. This provided,
in the statistical jargon, ample degrees of freedom for modellers, enabling them to devise risk
frameworks which, on the face of it, were very precisely calibrated in-sample.
And there’s the rub. The sample in question was, with hindsight, most unusual from a
macroeconomic perspective. The distribution of outcomes for both macroeconomic and
financial variables during the Golden Decade differed very materially from historical
distributions. Charts 1-8 illustrate this small sample problem. They look at the distribution of a
set of macroeconomic and financial variables, comparing the Golden Decade with a sample
stretching back in some cases to the 17th century. Even visually, these distributions plainly
suggest that the Golden Era distributions have a much smaller variance and slimmer tails.
More formally, Table 1 looks at the first four moments of these variables, comparing the
Golden Era with the full sample.
For the macro time-series, the differences in variability are striking. The long-run standard
deviation of UK GDP growth has on average been 4 times greater than during the Golden
Decade; for unemployment 5 times greater; for inflation 7 times greater; and for earnings 12
times greater. Put differently, as part of the Basel II regime the FSA require banks to simulate
the effects of a 1-in-25 year stress. In 2007, the worst such GDP growth outcome over the
preceding 25 year period was -1.4%; the average 1-in-25 year stress over the full sample is
-3.8%.
For financial time-series, small sample problems are even more acute, especially for events
in the tail of the distribution. Measures of kurtosis – the fatness of the tails – of UK house
price inflation are 6 times larger over the full sample than over the Golden Decade; for UK
bond yields 10 times larger; and for UK equity returns 16 times larger. To bring these stylised
facts to life, consider the distribution of equity returns in Chart 7. If we assumed the Golden
Era distribution was the true one, the three worst monthly returns in history – the bursting of
the South Sea bubble in September and October 1720, and Black Monday in October 1987 –
would have been respectively 12.7, 6.9 and 6.5-sigma events. All three would have appeared
to be once in a lifetime – of the universe – events.
Underestimation of risk, whether variances or tail outcomes, has consequences for the risks
facing both individual firms and for the system as a whole. As an example of the former,
Chart 9 plots some unconditional 90th percentile VaRs for a selection of UK banks, based on
their equity returns up until end-July 2007 and then extended to include the present crisis. 3
These unconditional VaRs for UK banks increase, on average, by almost 60% once the
sample is extended; and for some banks these risk measures more than double.
For the system as a whole, one way of illustrating the consequences of underestimating risk
is to translate it into “fair value” insurance premia. For example, consider a financial firm
offering insurance against moves in future equity prices by writing put options in mid-2007.
Pricing of this insurance is assumed to be based on the distribution of equity returns during

2

For example, Guttentag and Herring (1986a) and Herring (1999).

3

The banks themselves have been anonymised to protect the innocent.

4

BIS Review 18/2009

the Golden Decade. If the “true” distribution of returns were its long-run average, by how
much would this insurance have been under-priced in 2007?
Chart 10 provides some answers for a selection of strike prices for the option. The degree of
under-pricing of risk is large and is larger for options designed to protect against tail risks
(lower strike prices). For at-the-money options on UK equities, the insurance premium would
have been under-priced by around 45%; for options well out-of-the-money – say, 50% below
equity prices at the time – the mis-pricing would have been nearer 90%. This is risk underpricing on a dramatic scale.
These examples are no more than illustrative. But they help illustrate that the quantitative
consequences of disaster myopia were material ahead of crisis and may have contributed
importantly to the price of risk being set too low. And that, in turn, helped sow the seeds of
the credit boom.
Network externalities
Any asset portfolio is, in essence, a financial network. So the balance sheet of a large
financial institution is a network, with nodes defined by the assets and links defined by the
correlations among those assets. The financial system is similarly a network, with nodes
defined by the financial institutions and links defined by the financial interconnections
between these institutions.
Evaluating risk within these networks is a complex science; indeed, it is the science of
complexity. 4 When assessing nodal risk, it is not enough to know your counterparty; you
need to know your counterparty’s counterparty too. In other words, there are network
externalities. 5 In financial networks, these externalities are often referred to as contagion or
spillovers. There have been many examples of such spillover during this crisis, with Lehman
Brothers’ failure a particularly painful one. That is why there have been recent calls to
calibrate regulatory requirements to these risk externalities. 6
These network uncertainties make it tremendously difficult for risk managers to identify and
price, and hence manage, balance sheet risk. Consider first evaluating risks across the
portfolio of an individual firm. There is evidence that firms find aggregation of risks across
their balance sheet extremely difficult to execute. 7 To the extent this is done at all, it requires
firms to make assumptions about correlations between asset prices. But at times of stress,
asset correlation matrices are unlikely to be stable and correlations invariably head towards
one. So pre-crisis measures of balance sheet risk are likely to be significant under-estimates.
Chart 11 looks at asset correlations over the past few years. Note their instability and abrupt
upward shift during crisis.
These risk externalities will tend to be amplified when aggregated across the network as a
whole. This generates further underestimation of institutional risks. Consider again those
90th percentile VaR measures for UK banks. But instead of looking at unconditional VaR,
consider now conditional VaRs (CoVaRs) – that is to say, VaRs conditional on other
institutions in the network simultaneously facing stress. 8 As Chart 12 shows, this raises the
median risk facing UK banks by around 40%; and for some banks, risk estimates almost

4

Gell-Mann (1994).

5

Morris and Shin (2008).

6

See, for example, Brunnermeier, Crockett, Goodhart, Persaud and Shin (2009) and NYU Stern School of
Business (2008).

7

For example, a survey of stress-testing by the CGFS in 2005 found that only a small minority of firms
considered the effects of multiple shocks on their balance sheet.

8

Following the methodology of Adrian and Brunnermeier (2008).

BIS Review 18/2009

5

double. For a financial firm leveraged 20+ times, those risk revisions could be the difference
between success and failure.
Network risk externalities of this type impose formidable informational demands on banks.
For example, understanding the full consequences of Lehman’s failure would have required
information on the entire topology of the financial network. This is unrealistic even for the
authorities, much less an individual firm. Absent that knowledge, the financial system was
seized by network uncertainty. If this informational failure is not easily rectified by the actions
of individual firms, there is a case for the authorities attempting to provide that missing
informational public good, however difficult that might be in practice.
Misaligned incentives
Finally, and perhaps most contentiously, incentives and governance. Principal-agent
problems crop up in all aspects of economics. But it is questionable whether there is any
event in recent history where these agency problems have been exposed so frequently and
extensively as during the current financial crisis. It is easy to see why. Financial innovation
lengthened the informational chain from ultimate borrower to end-investor. The resulting
game of Chinese whispers meant that, by the time information had reached investors at the
end of the chain, it was seriously impaired.
In the narrower context of stress-testing, these principal-agent problems appear to have
operated at two distinct levels. First, internally, through the relationship between risk
managers and the risk-takers within financial firms; and second, externally, in the relationship
between financial firms and the authorities. The former principal-agent problem has been
rather less discussed, but appears to have been potent during the credit boom.
Decision-making within firms is an arm-wrestle between risk and return, between risk
managers and risk-takers. When returns are high and risks appear low, this arm-wrestle can
become one-sided. Power switches from back to front offices and risk managers become the
poor relation. 9 And what is true within individual firms is then amplified by behaviour across
the system as a whole, as firms conduct their own arm-wrestle with competitors for higher
returns on equity. The Bank’s market intelligence suggested this “keeping up with the
Jones’s” was a potent force within financial firms during the upswing.
The second principal-agent problem, between firms and the authorities, is different in kind
but similar in consequence. It arises because of a familiar public policy problem – timeconsistency. If the ex-post failure of an institution risks destabilising the system, any ex-ante
pre-commitment by the authorities to let it fail will lack credibility. This is simply a variant of
the old adage that if you owe the bank a small amount it is your problem, a large amount it is
theirs. These days, if a bank owes a small amount it is their problem, a large amount it is the
authorities.
This time-consistency problem weakens incentives for banks to consider for themselves
large-scale risks to their balance sheet which might induce failure. The safety net becomes a
comfort blanket, the backstop a balm. And the greater the risk these institutions themselves
pose in the event of failure, the weaker the incentives to manage risk. These are topsy-turvy
incentives from a public policy perspective, with risk management discipline weakest among
those whom society would wish it to be strongest.
And the evidence? A few years ago, ahead of the present crisis, the Bank of England and the
FSA commenced a series of seminars with financial firms, exploring their stress-testing
practices. The first meeting of that group sticks in my mind. We had asked firms to tell us the
sorts of stress which they routinely used for their stress-tests. A quick survey suggested

9

6

The KPMG survey of risk managers in October 2008 pointed to a similar conclusion, as does the FSA
consultation paper on stress-testing published in December 2008.

BIS Review 18/2009

these were very modest stresses. We asked why. Perhaps disaster myopia – disappointing,
but perhaps unsurprising? Or network externalities – we understood how difficult these were
to capture?
No. There was a much simpler explanation according to one of those present. There was
absolutely no incentive for individuals or teams to run severe stress tests and show these to
management. First, because if there were such a severe shock, they would very likely lose
their bonus and possibly their jobs. Second, because in that event the authorities would have
to step-in anyway to save a bank and others suffering a similar plight.
All of the other assembled bankers began subjecting their shoes to intense scrutiny. The
unspoken words had been spoken. The officials in the room were aghast. Did banks not
understand that the official sector would not underwrite banks mis-managing their risks?
Yet history now tells us that the unnamed banker was spot-on. His was a brilliant articulation
of the internal and external incentive problem within banks. When the big one came, his
bonus went and the government duly rode to the rescue. The time-consistency problem, and
its associated negative consequences for risk management, was real ahead of crisis. Events
since will have done nothing to lessen this problem, as successively larger waves of
institutions have been supported by the authorities.
More recently, the Bank and FSA have been engaged in some practical work with banks,
running stress-tests through their models on common scenarios. When asked to assess the
consequences of a macro stress-test, the like of which we are currently experiencing, some
banks have found it problematic. In defence, they have suggested that such an exercise was
only conducted annually as part of their Basel II preparations and as such new stress tests
would take months to conduct.
This too was revealing. If even the most obvious stress-test took many weeks to prepare and
assess, how could these tests meaningfully be used to manage risk? The short answer, I
think, is that stress-testing was not being meaningfully used to manage risk. Rather, it was
being used to manage regulation. Stress-testing was not so much regulatory arbitrage as
regulatory camouflage.
Prescribing some solutions
Each of these market failures has been exposed by events over the past 18 months. When
risks materialised outside of calibrated distributions, risk models provided little guidance in
identifying, pricing and hence managing them. This failure is not of purely academic interest.
The breakdown of risk models is itself likely to have contributed importantly to crisis
dynamics. Why?
First, the potential losses arising from under-pricing of risk are large. Consider the earlier
example of a disaster-myopic writer of deep out-of-the-money put options on UK equities,
priced using distributions drawn from the Golden Decade. Let’s say that, in June 2007, a fiveyear put had been written on the FTSE-100 with a strike price 40% below the prevailing
market price. Today, that put would be at-the-money. Hedging that position would crystallise
a loss roughly 60 times the income received from having written the option in the first place. 10
This example is far from hypothetical. These are essentially the same trades undertaken by a
number of insurance companies and other investors ahead of crisis. In the go-go years, the
insurance premia from them yielded a steady income stream. But when risk shifted, many
insurers have suffered large-scale losses as premia have adjusted and investors have
scrambled to hedge. The large US insurer AIG has so far suffered gross losses totalling over

10

Roughly half of that loss represents under-estimation of the distribution of returns back in 2007.

BIS Review 18/2009

7

$60bn on CDS contracts alone. Losses by the monoline insurers have also totalled in excess
of $60bn.
Second, the breakdown of these models had the consequence of turning risk into
uncertainty, in the Knightian sense. 11 Once the models broke down, how were assets to be
priced? Practitioners have a devil of a job pricing assets in the face of such uncertainty. So
too do academics, though some attempts have been made. 12 The theory of asset pricing
under Knightian uncertainty throws up at least two striking results. First, in the face of such
uncertainty, asset prices are not precisely determined but instead lie in a range. This
indeterminacy in prices is larger the greater is uncertainty and the greater agents’ aversion to
it. Second, asset prices exhibit a downward bias relative to fundamentals. Uncertainty gives
the appearance of “pessimistic” expectations.
Both of these theoretical predictions match pretty closely the moments of many asset prices
in the world today. Many appear to lack a clear compass relative to fundamentals. Most are
excessively volatile. Among investors, pessimism is the new optimism, with talk of a lost
decade in succession to the Golden one. Risk models – or the failure thereof – have played
their part in generating these foggy outcomes.
That is the diagnosis. What of the prescription? In their recent consultation paper, the
Financial Services Authority has outlined some very good proposals for improving stresstesting practices among financial institutions. 13 Based on my reading of the identified failures
in stress-testing, let me put forward a complementary “five-point plan”.
•

First, setting the stress scenario. The key elements here are devising a multifactor risk scenario that is sufficiently extreme to constitute a tail event. Arguably,
designing such a scenario is better delegated to the authorities than to individual
firms, in part because they ought to be more immune to disaster myopia. In its
Financial Stability Report (FSR), the Bank describes such stress scenarios. In
future, the Bank aims to be able to offer through the FSR some greater clarity to
financial firms about the sorts of vulnerability scenario it thinks they could use as
one (and only one) input to their stress-testing machinery. This might include both
solvency and liquidity-type scenarios. As the FSA have proposed, banks should also
test to destruction their balance sheets through “reverse” stress tests, in order to
identify potential areas of balance sheet weakness.

•

Second, regular evaluation of common stress scenarios. Having banks conduct
regular evaluations of their positions relative to a set of common scenarios (provided
by the authorities) would be an improvement on current practices in several
respects. First, it would allow some degree of benchmarking of results across
institutions; second, it would allow a degree of benchmarking, and hence peer
review, of models; and third, it would hopefully help in ensuring stress-testing
exercises form an input to management decisions and are not an annual regulatory
ritual. Comparing these bottom-up exercises with top-down evaluations conducted
by the authorities – the like of which have appeared in recent Bank FSRs – can also
help in benchmarking results and models.

•

Third, an assessment of the second-round effects of stress. The results of
these common stress evaluations should be the starting point, not the end point.
These common stress tests need to be made dynamic, so that the second and
subsequent round interactions, and their consequences for system-wide risk, can be
evaluated. This calls for an iterative approach to stress-testing in which banks’ first-

11

Knight (1921).

12

For example, Epstein and Wang (1994).

13

FSA (2008). See also Counterparty Risk Management Group (2008) for other useful suggestions.

8

BIS Review 18/2009

round results and management actions influence second-round stresses facing firms
– for example, the effects of asset sales and liquidity hoarding. In effect, what we
would then have is a hybrid stress test-cum-war game. This will better enable firms
to assess the spillover and contagion consequences of their own and others’
actions, so helping internalise to some degree the network externality problems
which have been prevalent through this crisis. This dynamic, collective approach to
stress-testing has already been attempted in one or two countries; it would be
desirable if it became standard practice more widely. The recent Geneva report on
financial regulation proposes greater use of such systemic stress testing. From the
authorities’ side, the Bank is developing a framework which will enable us to capture
such network effects – for example, the effects of liquidity contagion and asset price
disposals – on other firms in the network. The results from that framework could be
used alongside firm-specific results to gauge network risks. 14
•

Fourth, translation of results into firms’ liquidity and capital planning. The
results from these exercises need to influence management outcomes if they are to
be useful; the internal incentive problem needs to be overcome. So there should be
a presumption that the results of these dynamic stress tests are taken, for example,
to banks’ risk committees. And banks’ executives should periodically be asked how
they intend to respond to these findings, including how effective their defensive
responses are likely to be when the stress is system-wide and how the results affect
liquidity and capital planning decisions.

•

Fifth, transparency to regulators and financial markets. The bank-specific
results ought to inform regulatory decisions about firms’ capital and liquidity buffers.
Indeed, there is a case for having these results set out regularly in firms’ public
reports. This would hopefully help exert a degree of market discipline over
management choices, as has been proposed by the Treasury Committee. 15 Existing
disclosures by banks are a patchwork of different practices which make cross-firm
comparisons of risk nigh on impossible. Having a standardised, published set of
such stress-testing results would help improve financial markets’ understanding and
hence pricing of bank-specific risk – a particular problem during this crisis – thereby
helping address the external incentive problem.

Working alongside the other Tripartite authorities, the Bank would be interested in exploring
with financial firms the feasibility and desirability of putting this five-point plan into practice.
This plan is about making stress-testing more robust but also more relevant. It is about
providing that missing informational public good. In the arm-wrestle with management, it is
about supplying power to the elbow of risk-managers.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. As after the previous two episodes of systemic failure, in October 1987 and
August 1998, a third wave of technological transformation in the standards of risk
management is now needed as a matter of priority. Firms themselves admit as much. That
calls for a new agenda. I have outlined some elements of such an agenda, to address some
of the failures exposed by the crisis. These measures involve a greater degree of
engagement both between risk managers and senior management within firms, and between
financial firms and the authorities. They would also involve much greater transparency to the
wider world about risk metrics and accompanying management actions. These measures

14

Aikman, Alessandri, Eklund, Gai, Kapadia, Martin, Mora, Sterne and Willison (2008).

15

House of Commons Treasury Committee (2008).

BIS Review 18/2009

9

would not prevent a next time –nor should they – but they might help make risk management
roughly right.
References
Adrian, T, and Brunnermeier, M.K (2008), “CoVaR”, FRB of New York staff report no. 348.
Aikman, D, Alessandri, P, Eklund, B, Gai, P, Kapadia, S, Martin, E, Mora, N, Sterne, G
and Willison, M (2008), “Funding Liquidity Risk in a Quantitative Model of Systemic Stability”
paper presented at the 12th Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile on Financial
Stability, Monetary Policy and Central Banking (Santiago, 6-7 November 2008).
Anderson H.C (1846), “The Emperor’s New Clothes”, Danish Fairy Legends and Tales
(1846), Pickering. London.
Blaschke, W, Jones, M.T., Majnoni, G and Martinez Peria, S (2001), “Stress Testing of
financial Systems: An overview of issues, methodologies, and FSAP experiences”. IMF
working paper WP/01/88.
Brunnermeier, M, Crockett, A, Goodhart, C, Persaud, A and Shin, H (2009), “The
Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation”, ICMB-CEPR Geneva Report on the World
Economy 11 (preliminary conference draft).
Committee on the Global Financial System (2005), Stress Testing at Major Financial
Institutions: Survey Results and Practice, Basel.
CPRMG (2008), Containing systemic risk: the road to reform.
Epstein, L.G and Wang, T (1994), “Intertemporal Asset Pricing under Knightian
Uncertainty”, Econometrica, Vol. 62, No. 2, pp. 283-322.
Financial Services Authority (2008), Stress and scenario testing: Consultation Paper
08/24.
Gell-Mann, M (1994), The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the
Complex, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Guttentag, J.M. and Herring, R.J (1986a), “Disaster Myopia in International Banking”,
Princeton University Essays in International Finance, No. 164.
Herring, R.J (1999), “Credit risk and financial instability”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy
15:63-79.
House of Commons Treasury Committee (2008), “Financial Stability and Transparency,
2008: Sixth Report of Session 2007-08”, House of Commons Paper No. 371.
Jorion, P (2006), Value at Risk: The New Benchmark for Managing Financial Risk, 3rd
Edition, McGraw-Hill.
Kahneman, D, Slovic, P, & Tversky, A (1982), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and
biases. New York: Cambridge University Press
Kindleberger, C.P (1978), Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises,
Palgrave Macmillan.
Knight, F.H (1921), Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, Houghton Mifflin Co.
KPMG/Economist Intelligence Unit (2008), Never again? Risk management in banking
beyond the credit crisis.
Mackay C (1841), Extraordinary Popular Delusions & the Madness of Crowds, Wordsworth
editions.

10

BIS Review 18/2009

Morris, S, and Shin, H.S (2008), “Financial Regulation in a System Context”, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, mimeo.
NYU Stern School of Business (2008), Repairing the US Financial Architecture: An
Independent View.
Annex:

Chart 1: Probability density estimates

Chart 2: Probability density estimates

for UK GDP Growth

for UK RPI
Whole sample (1857-2007)
Golden Decade' (1998-2007)

Density
0.60

Whole sample (1857-2007)
Golden Decade' (1998-2007)

Density
0.60

0.50

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00
-15

-10

-5

0
5
10
Annual GDP Growth (%)

15

0.00
-40

-20

0
20
Annual RPI (%)

40

Chart 3: Probability density estimates

Chart 4: Probability density estimates

for UK Unemployment

for Annual Earnings Growth

Whole sample (1857-2007)
Golden Decade' (1998-2007)

Whole sample (1857-2007)
Golden Decade' (1998-2007)

Density
0.80

Density
0.80

0.70

0.70

0.60

0.60

0.50

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10
0.00

0.00
-5

0

BIS Review 18/2009

5
10
15
Unemployment (%)

20

-40

-20

0

20

40

-0.10

Annual Earnings Growth (%)

11

Chart 5: Probability density estimates

Chart 6: Probability density estimates

for UK Base rate

for UK House Price Inflation

Whole sample (1857-2007)
Golden Decade' (1998-2007)

Whole sample (1954-1997)
Golden Decade' (1998-2007)

Density
0.40

Density
0.08

0.35

0.07

0.30

0.06

0.25

0.05

0.20

0.04

0.15

0.03

0.10

0.02

0.05

0.01

0.00
-5

0

5
10
Base rate (%)

15

20

0.00
-20

0
20
40
House Price Inflation (%)

60

-0.01

Chart 7: Probability density estimate for

Chart 8: Probability density estimate for

FTSE All-Share Index

UK 2.5% coupon consol yield
Density

Whole sample (Jul 1700 - Nov 2008)

Whole sample (Jan 1693 - Nov 2008)

'Golden Decade' (Jun 97 - Jun 07)

0.24

'Golden Decade' (Jun 97 - Jun 07)

Density
0.10
0.09
0.08

0.20

0.07
0.16

0.06
0.05

0.12

(a) (b) (c) (d)

(c)(d)
0.08
(a)

(b)

0.04
0.03

(e)

0.02

0.04

0.01
0.00
-80

-60

-40

-20
0
20 40
Price return (%)

60

80

Sources: Global Financial Data and Bank
calculations.
(a) September 1720 (South Sea Bubble)
(b) October 1720 (South Sea Bubble)
(c) October 1987 (Black Monday – portfolio
insurance)
(d) July 1940 (WWII – merchant ships attacked)
(e) March 1974 (Price/wage controls, unions, etc.)

12

-400

-200
0
200
Change in yield (basis points)

0.00
400

Sources: Global Financial Data and Bank
calculations.
(a) March 1974
(b) October 1974
(c) June 1974
(d) January 1701

BIS Review 18/2009

Chart 9: 90th Percentile VaR for a

Chart 10: Percentage under-valuation of

selection of major UK banks, pre and

a put option on UK equities during the

post crisis

Golden Decade
Per cent

Per cent
20

VaR Pre Crisis

18

VaR Post Crisis

90
80

16

70

14

60

12

50

10

40

8

30

6

20

4

10

2

0
0.4

0
1

2

3

4

5
6
Banks

7

8

0.6

0.8

Strike

1

1.2

9

Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations

Sources: Global Financial Data and Bank
calculations.

Chart 11: Common component in asset

Chart 12: VaR vs CoVaR for a selection

prices

(a)

of major UK banks, post crisis
Per cent
70
60

VaR Post Crisis
25
Median CoVaR Post Crisis
20

50
15
40
30

10

20

5

10
0
0
98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08

Sources: Bloomberg, Merrill Lynch, and Bank
calculations.
(a) Proportion of variation in global equities,
emerging market equities, high-yield spreads and
commodities explained by a common component
over a three-month rolling window.

BIS Review 18/2009

1

2

3

4

5
Banks

6

7

8

9

Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations

13

Table 1: Distribution of UK Macroeconomic and Financial Time Series
Golden Decade

Long-run (a)

(1998-2007)
GDP Growth (%,

Mean

2.9

2.0

annualised)

Standard Deviation

0.6

2.7

Skew

0.2

-0.8

Kurtosis

-0.8

2.2

Retail Price Inflation

Mean

2.8

3.1

(%, annualised)

Standard Deviation

0.9

5.9

Skew

0.0

1.2

Kurtosis

-0.3

3.0

Unemployment rate

Mean

3.2

4.4

(%, annualised)

Standard Deviation

0.6

3.4

Skew

1.2

1.0

Kurtosis

0.4

0.3

Earnings Growth (%,

Mean

4.2

4.5

annualised)

Standard Deviation

0.5

6.4

Skew

0.2

1.1

Kurtosis

-0.1

3.8

House Price Inflation

Mean

11.6

8.8

(%, annualised)

Standard Deviation

5.8

9.2

Skew

0.7

1.1

Kurtosis

-0.4

2.0

Change in FTSE All-

Mean

0.2

0.2

Share Index (%,

Standard Deviation

4.1

4.1

monthly)

Skew

-0.8

2.6

Kurtosis

3.8

62.3

Change in UK 2.5%

Mean

-2.0

-0.1

coupon consol yield

Standard Deviation

18.5

18.4

(basis points,

Skew

0.0

0.5

monthly)

Kurtosis

3.1

32.2

(a) The long-run time series for GDP growth, retail price inflation, unemployment, and earnings growth begin in
1857. The house price inflation series begins in 1954. The FSTE-All Share Index series begins in Jan 1693. The
2.5% coupon consol yield series begins in July 1700. All data are for the UK.

14

BIS Review 18/2009

Charles Bean: The economic outlook
Remarks by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the National
Farmers’ Union Conference, Birmingham, 16 February 2009.
*

*

*

The weather is at the forefront of farmers’ minds but rarely crosses that of a central banker
except when, as two weeks ago, a dump of snow brings London to a standstill. But
economists’ lack of interest in the weather was not always the case. William Stanley Jevons,
one of the great Victorian economists, thought sunspot activity was the key to understanding
economic cycles. Sunspots affected the weather, which in turn determined crop yields,
demand and output in what was still a largely rural economy. No one takes this theory of
cycles literally. But it is a useful metaphor for the way unforeseen shocks can switch an
economy from one path to another. Today, the global and British economies have suffered
such a shock, though one that is man-made in origin rather than extra-terrestrial.
The origins of the crisis lie in the balmy economic weather prevailing in the decade or so
before mid-2007. Growth was steady and inflation low and stable in the United Kingdom and
other advanced economies, while rapid development in China, India and other emerging
market economies was lifting millions out of poverty. Economic stability boosted confidence
and encouraged an expansion of credit. Moreover, high levels of savings in some Asian
economies, coupled with loose US monetary policy, drove global real interest rates unusually
low. This mix of exaggerated confidence and low real interest rates encouraged investors
into riskier assets and banks into riskier lending, epitomised by the US sub-prime housing
market. That was compounded by a lack of incentive for care in extending loans, if they were
then packaged up and sold on to others.
In August 2007, the economic weather turned distinctly autumnal. Falling US house prices
and rising sub-prime defaults led to nervousness about the value of assets backed by those
mortgages. Moreover, losses associated with sub-prime loans began appearing in places noone had anticipated, revealing how opaque many financial instruments were. The markets for
these assets closed and their prices plummeted, putting pressure on the balance sheets of
the financial institutions holding them, while wholesale funding dried up. And the wide
dispersal of the suspect assets meant these balance sheet pressures were quickly
transmitted internationally. In the United Kingdom, banks became increasingly cautious in
lending, adding to downward pressure on housing and commercial property prices, and
slowing growth. But at that stage, it was still possible to envisage a relatively modest
slowdown, with financial intermediaries making the necessary balance sheet adjustments in
an orderly fashion.
However, the turmoil in credit markets was not the only factor the Bank’s Monetary Policy
Committee had to contend with. Oil prices, already high at the start of 2008, hit $147 a barrel
in July, while a broad range of other commodity prices rose sharply. That reflected continuing
strong demand growth in the emerging market economies coming up against inelastic
supply, augmented in the case of some foodstuffs by the development of bio-fuels and poor
harvests. Of course, you have experienced many of these developments at first hand. This
time last year, DEFRA’s measure of farm-gate prices had risen by 25% over the preceding
twelve months, while the Economist food index had increased by around 55%.
For much of last year, the MPC sought to balance these two forces: the turmoil in financial
markets, pushing down on growth and inflation; and the rise in commodity prices, also
pushing down on growth, but up on inflation. The latter proved to be the dominant force
through the first part of the year, pushing CPI inflation up to 5.2%, well above our 2% target.
Then, in September, an economic winter of unusual severity arrived. The global economy
experienced the equivalent of Jevons’ sunspot – the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Investors

BIS Review 19/2009

1

had assumed the US authorities would never allow a bank the size of Lehman’s to fail. The
resulting shock fatally undermined confidence in a number of similar institutions. You will
remember the period in early October when bank share prices fell precipitously and a
number of financial institutions around the world were rescued or closed. The financial
system was only saved from total seizure through the prompt and internationally co-ordinated
action of the authorities to inject extra capital into the banks, guarantee their funding and
boost the provision of liquidity.
Around the same time, the confidence of businesses and households, already weak,
collapsed. Many businesses told us the same story – that orders “fell off a cliff” in September
and October. That story was repeated around the world, and is evident in the surveys of
business activity (see Chart 1) and more recently in the first estimates for growth in the final
quarter of last year. The global economy is now in the throes of a sharp and synchronised
downturn.
Banks have responded to the loss of confidence in the financial markets, and the
deterioration in economic prospects more generally, by tightening the terms and availability
of credit so as to bolster their weakened balance sheets. That threatens to generate an
adverse feedback loop: the worse the outlook becomes, the lower the chance of a loan being
repaid and the more cautious the banks become about extending new loans, making the
outlook yet bleaker. We hear many stories of businesses finding credit harder to get, though I
understand that a recent NFU survey found that farmers’ relationships with their bankers
remained fairly good.
The only bright spot – at least for most of us, if not for you – has been the collapse in
commodity prices as the slowdown spread to the emerging market economies. Oil is back to
$45 a barrel (see Chart 2), while the Economist food index has fallen by over 30% (in dollar
terms).
Last week, we published our latest Inflation Report, laying out our current assessment of the
outlook. It does not make for pleasant reading. Global demand fell sharply in the fourth
quarter of 2008 and most forecasters expect a contraction in the advanced economies this
year and negligible overall growth (see Chart 3). Here in the United Kingdom, GDP is
estimated to have fallen by 1.5% in 2008 Q4. Business surveys point to a similar contraction
in the first quarter of 2009. Household spending is declining. Investment intentions have
fallen sharply. Credit availability has continued to worsen. And the four-quarter rate of growth
of overall money spending in the economy has fallen to its lowest since 1959 (Chart 4). A
sharp contraction in activity, both here and abroad, is already baked into the cake for the first
half of this year.
But there are grounds for thinking that conditions may start to improve later in the year, as
there is a substantial economic stimulus already in the pipeline. First, since October, the
MPC has cut Bank Rate by four percentage points to 1%, the lowest level in the Bank’s
315-year history. The dysfunctional credit markets mean that a given reduction in Bank Rate
has less impact on the economy than in normal times. Even so, it still represents a powerful
stimulus, which will take much of this year to work through. Of course, since interest rates
cannot fall below zero, we are running out of room for further cuts. But it must not be
forgotten that even if Bank Rate remains where it is, the recent cuts in Bank Rate will
continue to provide a building boost to demand through this year and beyond – we don’t
have to keep on cutting rates in order to provide a stimulus.
Second, in November, the Government announced a temporary cut in VAT and an
acceleration of spending on public investment projects, which should help support demand in
the near term.
Third, and most importantly, to supplement the measures taken last October, the
Government has launched a five-point plan to ensure an adequate supply of credit to
households and business. This comprises measures: to reduce uncertainty about the
adequacy of bank capital by capping the losses on their holdings of risky assets; to facilitate

2

BIS Review 19/2009

bank funding through the attachment of state guarantees; to boost the availability of funds to
business through direct purchases of company debt; to raise the availability of mortgage
finance to households by halting the running down of Northern Rock’s mortgage book; and,
finally, to establish a concordat with the banks under which they will maintain an adequate
flow of credit to the real economy.
The Asset Purchase Facility, operated by the Bank for the Government, will purchase up to
£50 billion worth of commercial paper, corporate bonds and similar securities, with the aim of
increasing the liquidity of these instruments, reducing the cost of capital to businesses and
stimulating increased debt issuance. As we estimate that illiquidity presently accounts for
getting on for half of the 5½ percentage points interest rate spread of investment-grade
corporate bonds over government debt, these actions, if successful, could have a powerful
impact on the cost and availability of funds to corporate borrowers. The first purchase under
this facility was made last Friday.
In the first instance, purchases are to be financed by government borrowing. But, subject to
the agreement of the Chancellor, this facility can also be used by the Monetary Policy
Committee to undertake further easing of monetary policy in pursuit of the inflation target.
That is likely to prove useful now that Bank Rate is nearing its floor. In that case, purchases
would be financed by the creation of so-called central bank money – effectively IOUs drawn
on the Bank of England. At such point, we might also want to expand the range of assets
purchased under the scheme to include government debt. The purpose of these actions
would be twofold: to push down the yields on a wider range of assets than usual; and to
increase the supply of broad money (bank deposits plus banks' own reserves) in the
economy. Both should help to boost nominal spending.
Some parts of the press have described this as “printing money”, linking it with the spectre of
hyperinflation and national bankruptcy. Now it is true that some – often corrupt –
governments have resorted to “printing money” in order to finance their spending when taxes
are hard to gather. But if the Monetary Policy Committee chooses to finance asset purchases
through the issuance of central bank money, it will not be to finance the Government’s
budget deficit. Rather, the aim will be to push up the rates of growth of the supply of money
and credit – which have slowed sharply (see Chart 5) – to levels consistent with steady
growth in overall nominal spending in the economy of around 5%, consistent with the
achievement of the 2% inflation target.
Bank Rate cuts, fiscal policy easing and measures to support the banking system should
together provide considerable stimulus to the economy as the year progresses, as will the fall
in commodity prices. Other countries have taken similar actions, which should bolster activity
overseas and thus the demand for our exports. In addition, the trade-weighted value of
sterling has fallen by almost a quarter since the middle of last year. That should encourage a
switch in demand at home and abroad in favour of UK-produced goods and services and
raise the profitability of exporting. Consequently, it will facilitate the necessary re-balancing of
the British economy away from consumption and help to close the UK’s current account
deficit.
So even if the near term looks bleak, there is reason to expect an improvement as we move
into the latter part of the year. Chart 6 shows our latest projection for four-quarter GDP
growth, assuming that Bank Rate follows the path expected by the markets. The most likely
path is represented by the darkest green band. In this scenario, output continues to contract
in the near term, as the weakening labour market and increased uncertainty weigh on
consumption, businesses run down inventories and reduce investment, and the weakness in
world demand inhibits exports. But activity gradually recovers in 2010, reflecting the strength
of the policy stimulus and the substantial boost from the lower level of sterling. However, it is
possible that efforts to restore the banking system may take longer to bear fruit, and that the
adoption of protectionist measures abroad as the downturn deepens may slow the recovery.

BIS Review 19/2009

3

Consequently the risks are heavily weighted to the downside, with roughly a three in four
chance of growth turning out weaker than in the central case.
Our associated projection for CPI inflation is shown in Chart 7. In the most likely path –
represented by the deep red line – inflation continues to fall from its current value of 3.1%,
falling below the 2% target in the spring, reflecting the impact of the Government’s VAT cut
and the fall in energy prices. The subsequent path is somewhat uneven as the VAT cut is
reversed next January, but the broad picture is for inflation to continue to run well below the
target in the medium term, as the downward pressure from the substantial margin of spare
capacity outweighs the waning impact on import and consumer prices of the lower level of
sterling. So the Monetary Policy Committee will probably need to take further action to return
inflation to the target in the medium term. That is a discussion we will no doubt have at future
meetings.
Before finishing, I want briefly to reflect on what this crisis means for the UK’s
macroeconomic policy framework. For 16 years, the inflation targeting framework worked
pretty well, delivering steady growth and low and stable inflation. In particular, the United
Kingdom managed to come through the Asia/LTCM crisis of 1997-8 and the aftermath of the
dot-com bust in 2001-3 relatively unscathed. But plainly it hasn’t prevented things coming
unstuck now. What has gone wrong?
This recession is rather different from its three large post-war predecessors, each of which
was associated with policy actions to curtail an inflationary boom that had got out of hand.
On this occasion, the boom was not in the market for goods and services, as the data on
growth, unemployment and inflation bear witness. Rather it was associated with a debtdriven boom in asset prices, including property. But the bust has not been confined to asset
markets and has instead infected the real economy of businesses and jobs.
In part, the problem stems from a failure of imagination. A number of bodies identified the
vulnerabilities that were building up as a result of the accumulation of debt. Indeed, in 2006
our own Financial Stability Report highlighted many of the risks which have subsequently
crystallised. And we debated these vulnerabilities at meetings of the Monetary Policy
Committee on various occasions. But no-one really foresaw the virulence with which the
crisis would unfold and the route it would take.
But even if we had, would it have made sense to have tried to curtail the accumulation of
debt by holding Bank Rate at a substantially higher level, particularly during the 2004-7
period? Aside from the fact that this would probably not have shielded us from a severe
downturn – countries around the world that did not experience rapid credit expansion have
still slowed sharply – it would just have implied markedly slower growth and higher
unemployment at an earlier stage. Is that the price we want to pay to curtail excessive
exuberance in the financial sector? My answer would be an unequivocal No. Instead, with
two objectives – macroeconomic stability and systemic financial stability – we need to
complement Bank Rate with another tool that is more directly focussed on the source of the
problem.
That tool is so-called macro-prudential regulation, under which banks and other systemically
important financial institutions would be subject to balance sheet constraints that reflect the
vulnerabilities to the economy that may be building. This could be, for instance, by making
banks build up extra capital buffers or reserves in the good times, which can then be drawn
on when times turn bad so obviating the need to cut back sharply on their lending. In this
way, the real economy can be protected from the financial excesses that seem prone to
recur. Central banks and banking supervisors are presently working to identify the best way
to provide this missing bit of the toolbox.
Last Saturday, I attended the meeting of G8 finance ministers and central bank governors in
Rome. Their determination to take whatever further policy actions was necessary to restore
their economies to health was evident. Right now, we may look to be in for a long and hard
economic winter. But, just as the chills of winter each year give way to the promise of spring,

4

BIS Review 19/2009

you can be equally sure that the current recession will eventually come to an end and
economic spring will arrive.

Chart 1 Business surveys of output in selected
countries

Chart 2 Oil prices

BIS Review 19/2009

5

Chart 3 Consensus forecasts for world GDP growth
in 2009

Chart 4 Nominal demand

6

BIS Review 19/2009

Chart 5 Broad money and credit

Chart 6 GDP projection based on market interest rate
expectations

BIS Review 19/2009

7

Chart 7 CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate
expectations

8

BIS Review 19/2009

John Gieve: Seven lessons from the last three years
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the London School
of Economics, London, 19 February 2009.
*

*

*

Introduction
As you know I am about to leave the Bank of England after three years as the Deputy
Governor responsible for its work on financial stability and as a member of the Monetary
Policy Committee.
It has been a game of two halves. The first 18 months from January 2006 to July 2007 were
the tail end of the Great Stability, a period of nearly 15 years of continuous growth, low
inflation, and falling unemployment. They were guided by and reinforced a wide consensus
that economics had discovered the right way to manage the economy and that the UK was a
good model of how to put it into effect.
The second 18 months have seen an extraordinary reversal: with turmoil in financial markets,
the credit crunch, and the onset of a severe global recession calling into question nearly
every part of that consensus.
The immediate challenge is to limit the depth and duration of the recession and bring the
economy back onto a sustainable path with low but positive inflation. But we have just set out
our analysis of the economy in our February Inflation Report and Charlie Bean explained the
policy options we face in a speech earlier this week. So I will focus today on some wider
implications of the last few years for the way we conduct economic and financial policy.
In doing so I am well aware that we are not yet at the end of the story. We don’t know how
deep and prolonged this recession will be or how soon and completely financial markets will
recover. So it is too early to reach settled conclusions on causes or cures. So I offer this as
an interim report: seven lessons I have drawn from my experience of the last three years.
A settled consensus
But let me set out first the position as it appeared in 2006.
For much of my life, the design of economic policy has been at the centre of both political
and academic contention. In the UK, over the twenty years following the breakdown of the
Bretton Woods arrangements, we tried everything from prices and incomes policies to
several varieties of monetary targets and finally fixed exchange rates and they all came to a
sticky end. But the approach we adopted after our ejection from the ERM was guided by
modern monetary economics and set us on a course which gathered growing support across
the political spectrum and in markets.
Macroeconomic policy
The new consensus was based in Britain on the experience of repeated bouts of inflation and
the three painful recessions which had been required to bring it under control. That
experience hammered home the lesson that there was no trade off between inflation and
growth. The best that macro policy could aim for was stable and low inflation which would
provide a platform for sustainable growth at a rate which would be determined in large part

BIS Review 21/2009

1

by the microeconomic policies which could affect the productivity and dynamism of the
economy.
The right instrument to maintain that low inflation environment was monetary policy. And to
ensure that interest rates were used to that end, and thus to condition public and market
expectations, the decisions should be taken by an independent Central Bank pursuing an
explicit inflation target and informed by modern macroeconomics.
Fiscal policy
In macro terms, fiscal policy was put on auto pilot. Discretionary changes in the
government’s tax and spending plans were thought to require too much time to agree and
take their effect to be of any practical use in stabilising the economy. And economists worried
that fiscal measures would prove largely impotent in any case – households and companies
would “look through” any cut in taxes today, which they expected to be financed by an
increase in taxes tomorrow.
So monetary and fiscal policy worked in tandem. Monetary policymakers relied on the
government to balance the books over the cycle so that the inflation target would remain
credible. And the government relied on monetary policymakers to stabilise the economy, so
that fiscal policy could focus on other aims: encouraging innovation, growth and employment;
redistributing income and investing in the public services.
A single regulator
Alongside this macro framework, there was a consensus that industry and commerce was
best left to the market with market failures and externalities controlled by independent
regulators, like OFGEM, OFCOM and OFWAT, rather than through ownership. In the case of
the financial services sector, responsibility was given to the FSA and banking supervision
moved out of the Bank. The new FSA inherited from the Bank an approach to prudential
supervision in particular which was based as far as possible on principles rather than a
detailed rule book .
There were positive and negative reasons for that move. The positive were that a single
financial regulator would be more effective at a time when the lines between banking,
insurance and securities dealing were breaking down. It was efficient for the firms to have
just one regulator to deal with and good for the regulator to be able to look at all aspects of
their business. On the negative side there was a worry that responsibility for supervision
even of banks could unbalance the Bank and distract it from its monetary role. So while the
Bank retained a role in promoting financial stability and monitoring the vulnerabilities in the
system as a whole, it was not given any statutory objectives or powers in the new legislation.
This piece of the UK system was controversial in some quarters but it definitely topped the
international best buy tables in 2006. The IMF called it a model for others and a succession
of governments visited London to learn from it. The Chairman of the FSA was invited by the
US Treasury Secretary to address the heads of the US regulatory bodies. And the Mayor of
New York City and a US Senator commissioned a report which concluded that the US
needed to learn from London’s approach to regulation if it was to arrest New York’s decline
as a global financial centre.1 In short the separation of the three authorities, each with a clear
remit and the independence to pursue it, was seen as a good model for a modern economy
(Chart 1).

1

2

http://www.nyc.gov/html/om/pdf/ny_report_final.pdf

BIS Review 21/2009

Revisiting the Great Stability
And it worked! We should not underestimate the achievement of the next decade. As
recently as fifteen years ago, low and stable inflation still seemed an unattainable goal. But,
research published by the Bank around the time I joined found that:
“the post-1992 inflation-targeting regime has been characterised, to date,
by the most stable macroeconomic environment in recorded UK history”2
As Chart 2 shows, volatility of both output and inflation hit new lows. Similar gains were
achieved overseas, although the break in macroeconomic performance appears to have
happened earlier in the United States.
In the UK we did indeed avoid the sort of cyclical booms in output, income and employment
we had seen in the 70s, 80s and 90s (Chart 3). Even with the benefit of hindsight, it is hard to
demonstrate that the economy was running significantly above capacity in the last few years.
The flow of migrants eased capacity constraints in the labour market and the surveys of
capacity utilisation rang no alarm bells (Chart 4). Indeed when I arrived on the MPC, some
members were arguing that we needed to cut rates again following a year in which
unemployment had increased and house prices appeared to have achieved the mythical “soft
landing” after a relatively light touch on the interest rate tiller.
And while the expansion of low cost producers in Asia had been a helpful tailwind, the
system seemed to have dealt with some big shocks, like the East Asian Crisis and the
bursting of the Dotcom bubble. So most commentators concluded that a good policy
framework had played its part.
The last 18 months have shown that the reduced volatility of growth and inflation did not tell
the whole story. There may not have been a boom in activity in the West but there certainly
was in many emerging markets. And rising savings there, channelled a huge flow of funds
into the world’s financial markets, depressing risk-free interest rates. After the postmillennium collapse in the world’s stock markets this was compounded by a coordinated
loosening of monetary policy. Cheap money supported an increase in leverage in the
financial sector (Chart 5). And banks became increasingly dependent on funding from
wholesale markets rather than their traditional deposit base. In the real economy, asset
prices rose and household balance sheets in particular became stretched.
Fast forward to the present day and the neat separation of powers and responsibilities
between policymakers has evaporated (Chart 6). Monetary policymakers are beginning to
explore unconventional tools to arrest the economic decline as nominal interest rates
approach the lower bound. Fiscal policy has returned as a major tool of macroeconomic
management as well as an essential support to the banking sector. And the Bank and the
Treasury have been drawn deeper into the financial stability realm. A substantial share of the
British banking system is now owned by the UK taxpayer.
Are these just temporary changes to deal with an exceptional crisis or were there some more
structural flaws in the original design and the consensus that underpinned it? I would draw
out seven lessons. (Chart 6)
Lesson 1: The limitations of private-sector risk management
One weakness in the system was the failure of banks and many other investors to
appreciate, price and manage risk.3

2

http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/workingpapers/wp290.pdf.

3

For a comprehensive discussion of these issues see the recent speech by Andrew Haldane, the new Director
of Financial Stability at the Bank, in Why banks failed the stress test.

BIS Review 21/2009

3

It was not that banks were blind to the froth in financial markets. For example, we published
analyses of the vulnerabilities in our Financial Stability Reviews in 2006 and 2007 and
highlighted the declining price of risk, the build up of global imbalances, the growing
dependence of banks on wholesale funding, and the risk that structured credit markets could
seize up in a downturn. When we took that message to Chief Executives of banks in London
and New York, they generally accepted the analysis and agreed that a correction was bound
to come. However, almost to a man (and they were all men), they took comfort from the
sophistication of their risk management systems and hedging strategies. They were
confident they could ride out the storm.
But as it turned out their systems were preparing them for a shower not for a hurricane. The
limitations of their risk models were cruelly exposed in August 2007. One CFO remarked last
year “We were seeing things that were 25-standard deviation moves, several days in a row”,
which in plain English means that according to their models, the outright impossible was
happening on a daily basis. According to the Value at Risk (VaR) benchmark for example –
which measures the amount an institution stands to lose on its portfolio given an abnormal
movement in market prices – there shouldn’t have been a big problem But that was partly
because recent experience grossly underestimated what the truly abnormal really was.
Updating these models to take account of the volatility in asset prices seen over the past 18
months suggests measured risk increases by a half and in some cases doubles (Chart 7).
Many of the models depended on relatively short runs of data – one year for many, ten years
at most. So the long period of stability reduced the projected losses from a future downturn
(Chart 8).
But the problem goes deeper than just choosing the right sample period to estimate these
VaR models. Using a longer back-run of data to re-classify August 2007 as an extremely
improbable 5 standard deviation event rather than an effectively impossible 25 standard
deviation event rather misses the point. The longer the build up of imbalances went on, and
the larger they became, the smaller the chance that the bubble could burst without a
correction. The events of August 2007 were not a bolt from the blue, an unpredictable
random disaster, but the culmination of several years of developments in financial markets
But inadequate models are not the only reason for being wary of putting too much weight on
risk management by individual firms. There is also the vital question of incentives.
Chuck Prince, the ex-chief of Citi, has been widely condemned for saying: “as long as the
music is playing, you've got to get up and dance.” But in a provocative way he was doing little
more than state the obvious. Firms are expected to maximise profits and if they won’t seize
the opportunities someone else will. Sit out the dance, and you risk getting swallowed by a
competitor.
In many ways the ideal risk management system for a single bank is one which lets it dance
until the music stops but then to get to the exits before its competitors - to take the profits
when they are available and to close out risks as near as possible to the downturn (or even
better profit from their competitors’ remaining exposures). It is noticeable that the investment
banks which did best in 2007 were not those which had stepped back from the new markets
well in advance but those which reacted most quickly and cohesively when the trouble
started in the summer of 07.
Of course other banks need to learn from their example and improve their own information
and control systems. But in a competition someone always has to come last and what
matters for the authorities is how much the weakest will be damaged and how far that
damage will spread through the system. What we saw in the autumn was that even the most
successful investment banks were put at risk by the failure of the weaker ones.
So one lesson we have learned from this crisis is that we cannot leave risk management to
the banks. Not only may they get it wrong but their risk systems, like their marketing, are

4

BIS Review 21/2009

directed at their competitive advantage and they are not motivated or in a position to look
after the system as a whole.
Lesson 2: Establish more effective crisis management
As Adair Turner set out very clearly in his recent speech, the events of the last year and a
half have revealed a number of particular gaps in the international regulatory regime. For
example, it gave too little weight to off-balance sheet exposures – the SIVs and conduits in
the shadow banking system which were holding huge portfolios of what turned out to be toxic
assets. The risks of losses on trading books were underestimated as were the risks in the
growing dependence of many banks on brittle wholesale funding markets. I am confident that
the G20 summit will endorse a practical set of measures agreed in the Financial Stability
Forum and the Basel Committee to tackle these points.
But we need also to beware of the dangers of over regulation. Some commentators seem
attracted to turning our banks into nationalised utilities. Certainly international capital markets
have complicated policy making but that is not a sufficient reason for dismantling one of our
most successful sectors. Moreover nationalisation has been tried in many countries and its
record is poor. It may reduce the risk of shocks but generally only at a heavy cost in
misallocation of resources (and usually a continuing drain on the public purse). In my view it
should only be a very last resort. The aim of the game should be to manage the system so
that society can enjoy the gains of a flourishing financial sector – the efficient allocation of
resources and transfer of risk – whilst minimising the threats to economic stability. So we
need to have effective systems not just for preventing crises but for dealing with bank failures
if and when they happen.
The collapse of securitisation markets in August 2007 and the failure of Northern Rock
revealed gaps in the UK’s arrangements, With the benefit of hindsight, the main problem was
not the handling of the initial rescue – although the tripartite’s footwork may have owed more
to John Sergeant than Fred Astaire. But I don’t think anyone believes now that the business
could have been saved. It was in terminal difficulties and it was right to rescue it and protect
depositors. The bigger problem was that, having stepped in, the authorities were hamstrung
by the inadequacy of the legal powers to resolve it quickly and cleanly.
We have learned from that autumn’s experience. Since then we have found imaginative
ways to provide the market with the liquidity it needs (through the Special Liquidity Scheme,
long term repos, and now the discount window), we led the world in recapitalising banks in
the autumn and we have resolved the banks which could not survive swiftly and effectively
both through private sector solutions and through the use of statutory measures.
I am delighted that tomorrow the first parts of the new Banking Act come into effect and give
the Bank of England new powers to resolve failing banks and protect depositors.
At the heart of the Act is the creation of a Special Resolution Regime for UK banks and
building societies. The FSA will have the power to trigger this regime before an institution
becomes insolvent. And once a bank is in the regime, the Bank will have the powers to
arrange for it to be wound up , drawing on a new bank-specific insolvency-procedure, or to
transfer the whole or part of the bank to a commercial purchaser, if necessary via a
temporary bridge bank owned by the Bank. If none of these options is sufficient to protect
financial stability, there will be the option of temporary public sector ownership. In the course
of the legislative process, we have identified and enacted wide ranging protections for netting
and set off and creditors generally to ensure that no one is made worse off by the resolution
than they would have been if the bank had gone into a simple administration.
The Act also puts the Bank’s financial stability objective onto a statutory footing and
formalises the Bank’s role in overseeing those payment systems that are essential to the
smooth running of the economy.

BIS Review 21/2009

5

Giving these responsibilities to the Bank is the right choice because they build on the role the
Bank already has as LOLR in crisis handling (which nearly always involves a crisis of
liquidity). More generally it provides a statutory basis for the Bank’s second core purpose –
financial stability – which was not mentioned in the 1998 Act and appeared something of an
orphan in the Bank when supervision moved to the FSA. Over the last 18 months of course
that has changed and the Bank is now closely involved with the FSA in monitoring and
intervening in banks and markets facing stress, as well as reviewing the risks to financial
stability more widely and playing a role in forming international policy through bodies like the
G20 and the FSF.
In effect the Bank has become a second pair of eyes alongside the FSA watching the health
of the financial system. The FSA, as the regulator, is informed by “bottom up” knowledge of
the position of individual institutions; the Bank is informed by a top down view drawing on its
own engagement in many markets and on its analysis of the wider economy. We come
together to monitor institutions when they become vulnerable.
Some argue that we should go further and move prudential supervision – at least of the main
banks - back into the Bank. That would certainly be workable – we have done something like
it before – and there could be changes in the euro zone which might add to the attractions of
a move in that direction.
However, it is important not to underestimate the costs of the transition and the new
boundary issues it would create. The cultures and staffing of the Bank and the FSA have
changed a great deal since 1997 and would not be easy to reshape. And there are genuine
costs for firms and supervisors in split responsibilities for different parts of complex groups.
Personally, I am not convinced there is a clearly superior arrangement to the revised
arrangements we have now put in place. It is not clear that any country has done much
better than the others despite the differences in regulatory structure. Perhaps Canada has
the best claim and that has a system similar in many respects to the UK’s.
Whatever the boundaries, in a crisis like today’s I am sure that cooperation between the
regulator, Central Bank, and Finance Ministry would be essential. I am pleased therefore that
the new legislation makes clear the duty of the Bank to cooperate with the FSA and
Treasury.
Lesson 3: Tighten international coordination
If the tripartite arrangements at home needed to be improved, cross border coordination
needs to be transformed if we are to avoid a drift back into a network of national and regional
financial enclaves.
The failure of Lehmans was a fully fledged disaster for the world economy. And a number of
other cases, from the failure of the Icelandic banks to Fortis, Dexia and IKB, have shown how
difficult it is to manage failures of international banks .
Yet the fact is that most of the key players in the world’s financial markets have developed
into large and complex multinational firms. Their business is not separated into national units.
Some core functions – such as risk-management and liquidity management – will be
centralised, and performed at the head-office. Activity at each hub cannot be viewed in
isolation: a multinational may raise deposits in one country to fund loans in another. And the
ultimate buffer against unexpected losses – capital – is fluid across borders in pursuit of
profit.
One response is to call for global regulators to deal with global institutions. That of course
means pooling national sovereignty over a key issue of economic policy. And it could also
require a global fiscal authority with deep pockets to whom the regulator could turn should
one of these institutions fall into distress. The task of persuading the US and China to hand

6

BIS Review 21/2009

over the regulation of their largest banks to a supranational regulator would make even the
greatest diplomat quail.
Another conclusion is that such multinationals pose too great a risk to stability and should be
subject to greater control by host authorities in each jurisdiction with the creation of separate
pools of capital and liquidity in each country. But that retreat from globalisation would also
have a cost in inefficiency and restraints on the flows of capital between countries. We
should not forget that the last decade of free financial markets has been a time of great
progress across the developing world in Asia, Eastern Europe and South America.
But the process of building up national controls is already underway in many countries
including even the UK which has long been one of the most open economies for capital and
ownership. It will continue unless we can convince each other that much better structures for
cooperation and coordination are in place. That is an acute problem within the EU where the
single market is based on a common passport. But dealing with the European problem is not
the main priority since most of the biggest banks in the world are based elsewhere.
I don’t think we should give up on this international agenda. The package of economic
measures that were rolled out late last year – from coordinated cuts in interest rates, to
provision of dollar liquidity and measures to support banks – showed the power and
possibility of coordinated action. The programme of work on the regulatory implications of the
crisis which has been coordinated by the FSF and will go in April to the G20 Summit
demonstrates a wide accord on the main regulatory issues.
But we need more progress on implementation as well as policy. In particular we need much
stronger cross border crisis planning – a subject on which I have been chairing a group
under the FSF. This has been bedevilled, in practice, by the sheer lack of information and
time to consult widely in the heat of a crisis. That we can do something about.
I hope we will agree two things to put to the G20 summit – a statement of principles on how
countries should cooperate in planning for and handling crises in cross border institutions
and a programme to put in place better arrangements for information sharing and cross
border dialogue on the largest banks in the world. Building on the core international colleges
of supervisors we would aim in peacetime to establish a shared information base among the
relevant authorities and jointly to think through the implications of failure for different
countries. That would at least give us the basis for considering a coordinated solution in
wartime. In time we should also try to establish greater harmony on national resolution
regimes which is on the Basel Committee’s agenda.
Lesson 4: Develop a new generation of macroeconomic models
So far I have concentrated on lessons for financial policy but this recession has also set
some challenges for the economics profession and cast doubts on the macroeconomic
modelling.
In truth, much of my critique of the models that financial institutions use to calibrate risk could
equally be levelled at the workhorse DSGE models that most economists and central
bankers use to describe and forecast macroeconomic developments.
These have a number of attractive features. It is built on sound economic principles of
forward-looking optimising agents, which is useful for carrying out academic though
experiments. Unfortunately, such models also have some big drawbacks.
First, having introduced uncertainty into the picture by making agents forward looking, they
then assume the problem away. Risk doesn’t matter: agents are assumed to make decisions
today based on the path they believe the economy will take in the future, not the full range of
possible paths it might take. And those beliefs about the future are based on absolute faith in
the ability of the policymaker to stabilise inflation and the economy over the medium term.

BIS Review 21/2009

7

They therefore beg some important questions for policy makers – how do we sustain and
build confidence in our policy and what happens if it falters?
Second these models generally assume that the path of the economy is one of equilibrium
disturbed by a sequence of more or less random shocks to which it responds in short order
to return to the equilibrium path. For economists using these models a critical question is
always what shocks have led to the starting position i.e. how far from equilibrium are we and
for what reason. Those starting assumptions will then condition the path back to trend growth
and target inflation over the medium term.
In truth, these “shocks” reflect not only events and surprises in the real world but the
limitations of the model itself. In particular, the models cannot deal easily with self reinforcing
movements away from equilibrium. What at first glance can look like a series of unrelated
unexplained disturbances to the variables in the model, could actually reflect some common
economic impulse that is not captured by the model. Whether those shocks die away, persist
or even build – and therefore how misleading the forecasts that the model produces are – will
depend on what’s missing from the model.
In fact the areas of the economy which the current generation of models do not cover well
include the areas where the imbalances were building up in recent years. The treatment of
financial markets and their interaction with the real economy is little more than a side-show.
Banks are typically absent altogether. Yet experience has shown that financial markets are
particularly prone to these self-reinforcing movements away from equilibrium. We have seen
in the last few months alone many examples of that. For example we have seen coordinated
sales of assets depressing prices, leading to write-downs on portfolios throughout the
system, which in turn have triggered a further wave of selling.
These features generally prevented these models from “joining up the dots” in the last
upswing and from capturing the impact of tightening credit conditions in the downswing.
I should emphasise that the MPC is not a slave to any one model. The current Governor
reminds us frequently that:
“It is vital never to confuse the world with a model. The whole point of a model is to abstract
from a wider range of factors in order to think clearly about one particular issue.”4
Over the last couple of years, for example, we have drawn on a range of models to capture
the impact of credit markets. The MPC bases its forecasts on all the evidence. And most
forecasts have a lot of added judgement in them. But our main macro model sets a baseline
for our discussions and forces us to quantify and integrate different judgements. It is difficult
to see how the committee could reach a consensus on a forecast (albeit with a probability
distribution around the central projection) without a model of some sort.
All models are simplifications and all models have difficulty identifying turning points. But we
badly need some new thinking to make them better. Putting banks into the models would be
a good place to start. The model of the banking sector which is being developed in the
Financial Stability wing of the Bank will make a good contribution to that.
Lesson 5: Mopping up after the bust is not a good strategy
The world’s central banks have tended to follow similar strategies. So much so that an
American economist, John Taylor, was able to neatly summarise how monetary policy is set
with a very simple rule. He found that movements in interest rates around their long-run level
could be explained by just the level of inflation relative to its target, and imbalances between
the level of demand in the economy and the capacity of the economy to produce output.

4

8

http://www.kc.frb.org/publicat/Sympos/2005/PDF/King2005.pdf.

BIS Review 21/2009

Asset prices and stock imbalances of the kind we have seen on the balance sheets of banks,
households and companies are conspicuous by their absence in the Taylor Rule. Whether
policymakers actually slavishly follow the Taylor Rule, or it simply represents a good
description of how we behave is largely immaterial. Either way, the default position of
policymakers has been that interest rates should not be used to choke off a boom in financial
markets. That non-interventionist doctrine was based on two key judgements.
First, that the costs of leaning against imbalances in financial markets were high. It was
believed that policymakers would find it difficult to differentiate between movements in asset
prices that could be justified by fundamentals and those which reflected bubbles. The central
bank which frequently responded to movements in asset prices would often as not be doing
so mistakenly. By the time that the central bank was confident that asset prices were
unsustainable it would typically be too late to act. An increase in interest rates late in the day
could prove counter-productive: the bubble might well have burst by the time the change in
policy had filtered into aggregate demand. Even when an imbalance could be identified early
enough to do something about it, the increase in interest rates required to choke off the
imbalance would have serious side-effects.
Much of this will be familiar to all policymakers, no matter what field they work in. It is a
“counsel of despair”. Understanding how developments in financial markets pose risks to the
system and the wider economy is a formidable task. But it is one we should embrace, rather
than shy away from. It is the final leg of the argument that is key: how much higher would
interest rates have had to have been in order to have contain the boom in financial markets.
Some commentators have made much of the Bank’s decision to cut interest rates by 25
basis points in the summer of 2005. But to pretend that all this could have been avoided had
interest rates been 25 basis points higher over the last couple of years seems to me pure
wishful thinking. Likewise, the idea that had rates been a little higher at the tail-end of the
boom in late 2006 and early 2007 the crash could have been averted is a flight of fancy.
Interest rates would have had to have been significantly higher for an extended period of
time, perhaps as far back as 2002/3. Growth would have been weaker. Inflation would have
undershot the target by even more than it did. Sterling would likely have risen, putting our
export sector under particular strain. Which leaves us with the question: is that a price worth
paying in order to avoid the fall-out when a bubble eventually bursts? And that leads us to
the second judgement that underpinned the non-intervention doctrine.
Prior to the latest crisis at least, many policymakers believed that the costs of allowing a
bubble in financial markets to run its course were relatively small. Interest rates could always
be cut after the event to “mop up” the damage. Blinder and Reis summarise the received
wisdom beautifully in their review of the decision to loosen policy when the DotCom bubble
burst:
“If the mopping up strategy worked this well after the mega-bubble burst in
2000, shouldn’t we assume that it will also work well after other,
presumably smaller, bubbles burst in the future?”
The large and coordinated cut in interest rates at the start of this decade almost certainly
contributed to the build-up of an ever larger bubble. So its not at all clear that the post-2000
mopping up strategy worked that well in retrospect – it just stored up more trouble for the
future. And even if it did work well last time around, I hardly need to add that mopping up the
fall-out from the latest crisis is stretching the world’s policymakers to the limit. It is evidently
not safe to rely on being able to mop up after the crash.
Lesson 6: Inflation targeting is necessary but not sufficient
A more fundamental question is whether the Inflation Targeting regime itself needs to be rethought.

BIS Review 21/2009

9

Some argue that the framework imposed a straightjacket on central banks including ours by
setting too narrow a remit. Interest rates could only be changed when there was a clear and
present danger to the near-term outlook for consumer inflation. So they could not be used to
prevent imbalances building up. Action was almost bound to be too late.
This critique takes an unduly narrow interpretation of the framework. There is nothing in the
MPC’s remit which would prevent us from consciously allowing inflation to undershoot the
target for some time, in order to avoid a significant overshoot at some point in the future. Or
as my fellow Deputy Governor Charlie Bean put it:
“a central bank seeking to stabilize inflation and output over a sufficiently
long time horizon, should necessarily aim to incorporate the possible
adverse long-term consequences of an asset price bubble in its
deliberations”
Intelligent inflation targeting on these lines run by independent central banks still seems to
me the best foundation for macroeconomic policy. But that does not mean the current
framework or the way we explain it is perfect.
First a point on communication. Inflation targeting was designed not just to control inflation
but as the best policy framework for promoting wider economic prosperity and stability. It is
crucial in a period of economic hardship – with companies going to the wall and people
losing their jobs – that people do not think the Bank is focused on a narrow inflation target for
its own sake. If they feel that we are not accepting responsibility for what happens to growth
and jobs, they will look for someone else to do so. If we want to preserve the framework we
have a job on our hands – now more than ever – to explain our strategy to the general public.
The Bank and MPC need to convince them that the policy we are pursuing is the best way of
restoring growth and full employment without reawakening inflation. Indeed it is by bringing
output back to potential that we will bring inflation back to target.
Secondly, I share the view that setting a target for a measure of consumer price inflation
which excludes the costs of home ownership has done us no favours. It is widely recognised
as a flaw in the harmonised CPI across Europe but it is of particular significance in the UK
given the critical role that home ownership plays here in household budgets and wealth.
Something needs to be done to remedy that situation, and if progress can’t be achieved at a
European level I think we ought to consider going it alone.
More fundamentally, if inflation targeting by an independent central bank is an essential
foundation of policy, it is pretty clearly not sufficient on its own. We are now learning a lesson
that Japan learned a decade ago. As the Governor of the Bank of Japan recently remarked
“if inflation targeting regimes induce market participants to think of
monetary policy decision-making process in terms of an inflation number,
they tend to overlook the insidious build-up of unsustainable
imbalances […]. Inflation targeting works well if it is properly understood…
(but this) can be difficult once an economy has attained and maintained a
low inflation rate for a number of years.”
This is partly a matter of adopting the intelligent approach inflation targeting. We must be
willing to “lean against the wind” of asset price booms and credit expansion and to tolerate
somewhat weaker growth and lower employment in doing so.
But if we need to prevent asset price and credit booms as well as control consumer prices it
would be better to have two instruments than one and that is the last lesson I want to discuss
– the need to develop instruments which directly dampen the cycle of credit growth and asset
prices.

10

BIS Review 21/2009

Lesson 7: We need another instrument to stabilise the economy
The first step must be to decide how ambitious we want to be and define the objective. Then
we can design the instruments. I don’t think we have all the answers yet. But the outlines of a
scheme are beginning to emerge in the academic literature – not least in an impressive
recent report by Charles Goodhart of this parish and friends – and they are being taken up
vigorously ( especially by the British members) of the FSF and G20.
Preventing the regulatory system from exacerbating the cycle
A minimum step is to remove as far as possible features of the regulatory system which
exacerbate the cycle. This is not as easy as it sounds. Both accounting rules on provisions
and regulatory capital requirements are based on estimated probabilities of default and
estimates of losses given default. Both of these tend to rise sharply when an economy turns
down, arrears mount and the value of collateral declines. So as trading conditions tighten,
capital requirements are raised.
The FSA announced last month a series of measures which seek to address that pro
cyclicality by basing their capital requirements on average loss rates through the cycle rather
than on estimates of loss which vary through the cycle. A similar approach is being ironed
out internationally in the Basel Committee and FSF.
Protecting the banks from the cycle
A more ambitious goal would be to use the regulatory system to dampen the impact of the
economic cycle on banks and other financial institutions – to protect the banks from the
cycle.
The Spanish system of dynamic provisioning is an example of this approach. This is based
on the observable facts that arrears and defaults tend to emerge in downturns and that loans
written at the top of the cycle tend to have higher losses. Banks are required therefore to set
aside a general provision against likely future loss each time they write a loan on the basis of
a formula which is sensitive to the cycle. This is an accounting provision so these provisions
are deducted from profits when they are made, and reduce dividends and profit related
bonuses. They are then drawn down automatically as losses appear. In effect this requires
banks to build up reserves in the upswing of a cycle which can cushion their losses in the
downswing. The system has not prevented a property boom and bust in Spain but it has put
their banks in a much stronger position to survive it by calling on these general provisions
which amounted to over 1% of total assets.
And in the process of protecting the banks from the cycle, this system has helped to some
degree to dampen the cycle itself. Varying capital regulations in this way can act as a brake
on the exuberant swings in lending we have seen in recent years. By requiring banks to
hoard capital in the upswing, regulators make it more expensive for banks to lend money.
And by dampening the credit cycle policy could help stabilise spending in the real economy.
Protecting the cycle from the banks
In my view there is a case for taking this further and adopting the more ambitious goal to use
regulatory requirements to smooth out the credit cycle. In other words, preventing the
imbalances within financial markets destabilising the real economy.
This would involve varying the regulatory requirements to stabilise the supply of credit and
the terms on which it was granted – for example by requiring banks to hold more capital
when they would otherwise be loosening credit conditions, and allowing banks to run down
capital when they would otherwise by restricting access to credit. This approach could offset

BIS Review 21/2009

11

to some degree not just a domestic credit cycle but the impact of developments elsewhere in
the global economy which affect the terms on which banks are able to raise funds in financial
markets or the he value of their assets.
To a limited degree this would allow the authorities to make the banking system a shock
absorber. Policymakers would be raising capital requirements to preventing shocks that
occur outside the banking system from destabilising the real economy. But I would limit the
goal to smoothing the credit cycle and would not be inclined to go further and use it as a
general stabiliser of the economy.
Weapons in the arsenal
So what is the choice of instruments?
I see great attractions in “dynamic provisioning”, in other words amending the accounting
system to recognise likely future losses. That seems to produce a better guide to the real
financial strength of banks and to be properly conservative in not recognising profit before it
is earned. I am aware that this runs counter to a powerful school of accounting theology but I
have been encouraged by proposals circulated recently by Paul Boyle at the FRC for cyclical
reserving and I hope that will be pursued.
An alternative approach would be to vary regulatory capital floors with the cycle and require
banks to hold undistributed reserves in the upswing which could be drawn on in the
downswing. This is a second best because the reserves are taken after profit is struck, with
all the signals that sends investors and staff. But it could have much the same effect as
dynamic provisioning and may be capable of implementation rather earlier.
But capital requirements are not the only approach. Counter cyclical limits could be
introduced on the liquidity position of a bank. For example, banks might be required to invest
a varying proportion of their assets in a war-chest of government bonds and highly liquid
assets. Or they could face varying constraints on the extent to which they are allowed to tap
short-term wholesale funds.
Finally we could introduce restraints on the terms on which banks can lend money to
households and companies. Loan to income and loan to value ratios tend to rise in any credit
boom as lending standards become lax and asset prices inflate. In theory, a ceiling on these
ratios could have provided an effective brake on the excesses of the last boom. While this
has obvious microeconomic disadvantages, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority showed how
such an approach could work in practice in the 1990s: tightening the constraint on loan-tovalue ratios as their property market threatened to overheat. Another possibility would be
compulsory margin requirements on trading positions.
I am clear that counter cyclical capital requirements are a large part of the answer but I would
be inclined to keep a number of other options open too. Having a large arsenal of policy
instruments, which vary in their point of influence provides some welcome flexibility. It allows
the policymaker to respond appropriately to a particular situation, rather than treating all
shocks the same. For example, if problems are concentrated within the property market then
caps on loan-to-income and loan-to-value ratios might be effective. If instead the problem lay
in funding markets, with an unwarranted compression in risk premia, then the instruments of
liquidity regulation would be more appropriate.
Who calls the shots?
That leads on to the issue of who should have control over these policy instruments? The
answer I think very much depends on the objective of policy and the way in which policy is
set.

12

BIS Review 21/2009

Clearly the application of the policy would be for the regulator. If policy is given the narrower
goal of protecting the banks from the cycle and it proves possible to set clear rules in place
(for example a simple leverage ratio) there would be no need for a further policy maker to be
involved.
However if policy is given the broader macroeconomic goals of stabilising credit – protecting
the cycle from banks if you will – and judgement is required on the state of the cycle and
whether and when to vary the rules, then it would be essential for the Central Bank to play a
leading role, albeit in close consultation with the regulator. In my view that is the more likely
outcome.
Conclusion
One theme you may have noticed in these reflections is the need for policy makers to be
willing to back their judgements – whether in identifying asset bubbles or identifying firms or
markets which threaten financial stability – and to take pre-emptive action.
For example, if most macro-models were not giving us warning signals in recent years, our
analysis of the financial sector certainly was. As I mentioned earlier, successive Financial
Stability Reports did set these dangers out in 2006 and 2007 and indeed earlier. One of the
lessons we have acted on already is to make more of such warnings. We now send the
summary reports to every board member of British banks, to the rating agencies and to the
banking analysts and we are more forthright in emphasising the dangers through the press in
order to try to change the atmosphere in markets.
But more broadly, we must not let a proper starting assumption that markets should be
allowed to work unless there are good reasons for intervention to become a belief that
markets are not to be touched unless their failure and the effectiveness of intervention is
proved beyond all reasonable doubt. Of course there are risks that some interventions will be
proved with hindsight to be too costly or unnecessary. But the economy is not an area, to
paraphrase Blackstone, where
“it is better for ten guilty markets to escape than for one innocent to suffer”
As Alan Greenspan recently observed to the House Oversight Committee,5 rather than
assuming that the system is capable of self-regulating itself, our default position should be
one of cautious scepticism. The burden of proof for the authorities should be the balance of
probabilities.
Charts
Chart 1 : The Separation of Powers

5

‘I made a mistake in presuming that the self-interest of organizations, specifically banks and others, were such
is that they were best capable of protecting their own shareholders and their equity in the firms. And it’s been
my experience, having worked both as a regulator for 18 years and similar quantities, in the private sector,
especially, 10 years at a major international back, that the loan officers of those institutions knew far more
about the risks involved and the people to whom they lent money, than I saw even our best regulators at the
Fed capable of doing. So the problem here is something which looked to be a very solid edifice, and indeed, a
critical pillar to market competition and free markets, did break down.’ See the preliminary transcript of the 23
October 2008 meeting of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee on The Role of Federal
Regulators in the Financial Crisis.

BIS Review 21/2009

13

Bank of England

Stabilisation

MoU

Equity &
Efficiency

Regulation

FSA

HM Treasury

Chart 2 : The Great Stability
Variance of inflation

( )A

ld

De jure gold standard
(1855-1913)

Floating of the pound to inflation targeting
(1972-1992)

Bretton Woods
(1948-1972)
Inter-war period
(1922-1939)
Inflation targeting
(1992-2004)

0

1

2

3

Chart 3: Consumption Growth

14

4

Variance
of6output
5

7

Chart 4: Indicators of labour market
tightness

BIS Review 21/2009

Percentage changes on a year earlier
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

1973 Q3
1980 Q1
1990 Q3
2008Q3
-16

-12

-4
-6
-8

-4

0

4

8

12

16

Chart 5 : Change in leverage ratios of the major
UK banks(a),(b),(c)
Maximum-minimum range
Interquartile range

Change in ratio
40

Median

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

S o urc e : P ublis he d a c c o unts a nd B a nk c a lc ula tio ns .
(a ) Le ve ra ge ra tio de fine d a s to ta l a s s e ts divide d by to ta l e quity e xc luding
m ino rity inte re s t.
(b) Due to da ta lim ita tio ns , the c ha rt o nly pre s e nts info rm a tio n o n A&L, B &B ,
B a rc la ys , HB OS , HS B C , Llo yds , No rthe rn R o c k a nd R B S .
(c ) The re is a bre a k in the s e rie s due to the intro duc tio n o f IF R S in 2004.

BIS Review 21/2009

15

Chart 6 : All hands to the pump

Bank of England

Stabilisation

Equity &
Efficiency

Regulation

FSA

HM Treasury

Chart 7 : Stylised Value at Risk Chart 8: The Great
calculations, pre and post crisis
historical context
20

VaR Pre Crisis

18

VaR Post Crisis

Stability

Density
0.60

150 years of data
10 years of data

16

in

0.50

14

0.40

12
10

0.30

8
6

0.20

4

0.10

2
0
1

16

2

3

4

5
6
Banks

7

8

9

0.00
-15

-10
-5
0
5
Annual GDP Growth (%)

10

15

BIS Review 21/2009

Mervyn King: Finance – a return from risk
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Worshipful Company of
International Bankers, London, 17 March 2009.
*

*

*

Master, Sheriff, My Lords, Alderman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Introduction
The financial turmoil that began in August 2007 led to a financial panic in September 2008
and now to a severe worldwide economic downturn. It is fair to describe the events that
followed the failure of Lehman Brothers as the Panic of 2008 because of the almost complete
collapse of confidence in financial institutions and the flight of funding that ensued. Perhaps
we had forgotten that such panics and banking crises have occurred with depressing
regularity in the financial systems of market economies. But the history of the City is in large
part the history of banking crises.
The measures that central banks took, and continue to take, to restore confidence in the
banking system were extreme and on an extraordinary scale – the Bank of England has lent
hundreds of billions of pounds to the banking system. But they were not unprecedented – it
has happened many times before in crises over the years. So I want tonight to reflect on why
we seem to find it so difficult to learn from experience.
But even when set against that historical background, the extraordinarily sudden, severe and
simultaneous downturn of activity and trade in every corner of the world economy last
autumn is remarkable. A collapse of confidence in the coffee houses of Lombard Street was
one thing; a collapse of confidence in the world economy is quite another.
An examination of these parallels will, I hope, help to throw light on three questions. First,
does the nature of financial risk explain the frequency of crises and what does it imply for the
design of banking regulation? Second, what are the lessons from the crisis for central banks
in their pursuit of both monetary and financial stability? And, third and most urgently, how do
we find our way out of the present crisis?
The nature of financial risk and its implications for the regulation of banks
There is no shortage of proposals for reform of bank regulation from official groups, such as
the Financial Stability Forum, and unofficial groups, such as the G 30, chaired by Paul
Volcker and the Geneva Forum. Since the excessive risk-taking of recent years has now
given way to an extraordinary degree of risk aversion, there is no hurry to choose among
them. Whatever exuberance – rational or irrational – existed has been destroyed by the
crisis. So we have time to reflect before we decide on the shape of a new regulatory system.
Another reason for reflection is that recent years have seen a natural experiment. Some
regulatory systems were light touch, others heavy touch, and yet others placed both
ownership and regulation of banks in the public sector. Yet they all failed to some degree to
prevent the accumulation of risks that finally produced the crisis. So it is unlikely that there is
a simple answer.
Any plan for reform should take into account the nature of financial risk. Why were so many
people misled for so long? And was there an inherent weakness in the structure of modern
banking?
Banks are dangerous institutions. They borrow short and lend long. They create liabilities
which promise to be liquid and hold few liquid assets themselves. That though is hugely

BIS Review 32/2009

1

valuable for the rest of the economy. Household savings can be channelled to finance illiquid
investment projects while providing access to liquidity for those savers who may need it.
But given how risky banks are, it should not be surprising that from time to time they get into
trouble. And they have done so regularly since banking began. Confidence in a bank can
disappear quickly making it vulnerable to a destructive bank run. If a large number of
depositors want liquidity at the same time, banks are forced into early liquidation of assets –
lowering their value. And, of course, if banks make sufficient unwise loans to borrowers who
do not repay, then that can threaten solvency as well.
Banks can of course take their own actions to ensure that investor confidence is maintained.
For example, a visible source of liquidity helps. In the panic of 1906, the founder of what is
now the Bank of America displayed his gold reserves on the street and offered to convert
deposits into gold, creating confidence in his bank at a time when many others failed. Forty
years ago, the clearing banks in London held around 30% of their assets in short-term liquid
instruments. Today that liquid assets ratio is about 1%. For the major UK banks, almost 25%
of customer loans are now funded by short-term borrowing in wholesale markets. At the turn
of the new century it was close to zero. This was the distinctive feature of the contemporary
British model of banking. Distinctive it may have been; sensible it was not. HBoS and RBS
paid the price as the availability of this funding dried up, and not one of the building societies
that de-mutualised in the 1980s and 1990s in order to expand beyond the constraints of their
deposit base has survived as an independent entity.
Banks have changed. They have encouraged the expansion of proprietary trading, the
funding of long-term assets in short-term wholesale markets, a rapid expansion of balance
sheets and a marked rise in leverage. Commercial banks followed the path of investment
banks. Balance sheet size and high leverage were seen as the key to obtaining funds at
lowest cost. The total assets held by the world’s largest banks roughly doubled in the five
years to the end of 2008, and leverage in UK banks rose on average by two-thirds. The bulk
of credit growth in the economy as a whole was taking place within the financial sector. And
the complexity of the products being created made it hard to evaluate the underlying risks.
Why did banks change so much and take risks which eventually led to some spectacular
downfalls? Ultimately, the main factor was an inability to perceive the true nature of the risks
involved. In this they were not alone.
John Maynard Keynes took pains to distinguish between risk, where probabilities or
frequencies could be calculated, and uncertainty, where there is no scientific basis on which
to form any probability estimates. Keynes went on, in an article published in 1937, to spell
out exactly how we tend to behave in the face of such ignorance. It explains a great deal of
recent behaviour in financial markets. Keynes argued that uncertainty affects our behaviour
in three ways:
“(1) We assume that the present is a much more serviceable guide to the future than a
candid examination of past experience would show it to have been hitherto. In other words
we largely ignore the prospect of future changes about the actual character of which we
know nothing.
(2) We assume that the existing state of opinion as expressed in prices and the character of
existing output is based on a correct summing up of future prospects, so that we can accept
it as such unless and until something new and relevant comes into the picture.
(3) Knowing that our own individual judgement is worthless, we endeavour to fall back on the
judgement of the rest of the world which is perhaps better informed. That is, we endeavour to
conform to the behaviour of the majority or the average. The psychology of a society of
individuals each of whom is endeavouring to copy the others leads to what we may strictly
term a conventional judgement”.
This suggests that it is very hard to take a truly independent view – especially a contrarian
one that recognises the possibility that improbable but conceivable events could result in

2

BIS Review 32/2009

large losses. In other words, the sheer difficulty of forecasting the future makes it hard for
contrarian investors without substantial net worth to survive in the market. As a result the
market is vulnerable to “sudden and violent changes”. As Keynes put it, “the forces of
disillusion may suddenly impose a new conventional basis of valuation. … At all times the
vague panic fears and equally vague and unreasoned hopes are not really lulled, and lie but
a little way below the surface”. So a conventional wisdom that leads to a speculative mania,
can quickly collapse as sentiment turns on its head.
But a speculative mania is not the product solely of the creative imagination of financial
engineers. It requires the willing collaboration of gullible investors, who may not fully
appreciate the risks that they are taking. Take a simple example of an investment that
provides a long, regular stream of profits interspersed with occasional large losses, such that
on average you would expect it to have the same return as a safe investment – not an
unreasonable characterisation it would now appear of many of the investment strategies of
recent years. Over short time periods, where it is unlikely that disaster will strike, it is more
likely than not that investors will come out ahead, with a high return. But over long periods,
where the risk that disaster will strike at some point is higher, it is likely that the overall return
will be worse than the safe investment. And, because charges are often structured so that
investment managers receive more of the upside from risky behaviour than they share in the
downside, they have an incentive to promote the risky investment strategy. That, allied to a
massive increase in the complexity of financial products and instruments in recent years, has
meant that investors have, perhaps unwittingly, aided an enormous increase in the risks
being run in the financial system.
Given these problems, it seems to me that regulation should aim to be simple and robust.
Overly complex measures of risk and capital adequacy are rarely robust to developments
that are easy neither to anticipate nor calibrate. And robust rules for regulation will of
necessity need to be simple or supervisors will be lost in a morass of unnecessary detail.
For the same reasons we should not expect too much of regulation. Conventional judgment
is a safe haven for bankers and regulators alike. It is not easy to persuade people, especially
those who are earning vast sums as a result, that what looks successful in the short run is
actually highly risky in the long run.
As in monetary policy, it is unlikely that prudential supervision can be implemented as a set
of rules to be applied mechanically. Nevertheless, to rely solely on the discretionary
judgment of individual bankers and regulators is asking too much of human capabilities. This
suggests that the principle of constrained discretion, applied so successfully in monetary
policy, needs to be applied to banking regulation. That is not to say that a similar institutional
apparatus would be appropriate, but we need to build into the system some simple and
robust impediments to excessive risk-taking that can be monitored. And we must ensure that
an institutional memory is maintained so that the lessons from the crisis are not forgotten and
those impediments to excessive risk-taking are not swept away once memories of the crisis
recede.
The design of those impediments should be based on an explicit identification of the market
failures that regulation can hope to correct. Such market failures seem to relate to two
dimensions of banking – the “cross-section” and the “time-series” aspects of behaviour. The
former reflects the extreme interconnectedness of banks. Each individual institution can
appear relatively safe while the links between them mean that the system as a whole is
vulnerable. Any shock could lead banks to fail through a domino effect. The superstructure of
complex transactions within the financial sector (in derivatives for example) greatly increased
this interconnectedness.
The time-series aspect is the pro-cyclical behaviour of risk-taking in the financial system that
I described earlier. Optimism feeds on itself until the occasional setback changes the mood
to one of pessimism. And individuals are reluctant to accept that success may not be the

BIS Review 32/2009

3

result of superior wisdom, which should naturally be reflected in compensation, but the shortrun outcome of a risky strategy.
To deal with the “cross-section” problems we need to reduce the exposure of the system to
domino effects. For some, especially over-the-counter, markets this could be achieved by
increasing the role of central counterparty clearing houses. Much good work on this is going
on, led by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. But a clearing house should not be an
excuse for allowing flawed financial instruments, such as many of the mortgage-backed
securities, to be treated as high quality assets.
We also need to improve the regulation of the liquidity of banks. After the crisis began, the
most striking feature of the regulatory system, as embodied in the Basel arrangements and
implemented in the UK, was the absence of any effective regulation of liquidity. The FSA is
acting to remedy the situation, and the Bank is in active discussion with FSA about how such
regulation should best be implemented.
More attention has been paid to the “time-series” dimension where there is now a clear
international consensus among the members of the Financial Stability Forum and the Basel
Committee that some form of counter-cyclical prudential supervision is required. The
principle has been established.
To correct these types of market failure will require a system of regulation that effectively
marries the “top down” assessment of the risks to the system as a whole to the “bottom up”
supervision of individual institutions. The present system has not delivered that.
A lot of detailed work needs to be done to convert these general principles into concrete
implementation. How would the interaction between the “cross-section” and “time-series”
risks be taken into account? Would the framework take the form of an addition to capital
requirements as a function of the degree of maturity mismatch, leverage or the rate at which
the balance sheet was expanding? Or would there be a limit on leverage ratios? How would
leverage and maturity mismatch embedded in the assets side of the balance sheet be taken
into account? And how would the framework be implemented for banks whose assets and
liabilities span jurisdictions? Can we define a group of institutions that are systemically
significant? In the present crisis most institutions are deemed to be potentially systemic
because of the impact of the failure of any of them on creditor confidence. If most banks
appear systemic in a crisis won’t countries want to require foreign banks to be subsidiaries
not branches? And, more fundamentally, should there be a Glass-Steagall type of provision
to prevent retail deposits from being used to fund investment banking activities? There are
good arguments in favour – to separate the utility functions of a retail bank taking household
deposits and running the payments system from the casino trading of an investment bank,
and good arguments against – the difficulty of maintaining a credible boundary between
those institutions that are eligible to receive government support and those that are not. We
need a public and informed debate on the merits of the arguments.
We also should reflect on the fact that the belief that the authorities will step in when risks
materialise encourages risk taking and means that risk-adjusted returns to financial activity
are too high. The experience of unsustainably high returns in normal times interspersed by
regular crises has been repeated across countries and over time. So if banks are to bear the
true cost of the risks they take, changes need to be made to the environment in which banks
operate.
All these are important issues. While committing at international level to broad principles on
regulatory reform, such as extending the net to all highly leveraged institutions and making
capital requirements counter-cyclical, there is time to think through carefully the best way to
implement them, and it is important that we take it.
Many of these questions about the future of the regulatory structure will be discussed in the
Turner review to be launched tomorrow. The Bank awaits the Review with interest. It will
wish to take time to reflect carefully on the Report before expressing a view.

4

BIS Review 32/2009

Given what has happened there is now international support for developing a counter-cyclical
toolkit for the prudential supervision of banks. But let us be clear what such tools would have
entailed had they operated in the past. They would have imposed constraints on the growth
and profitability of bank balance sheets. They would have been seen as a tax on the success
of the investment banking community and the City of London more generally. And that would
have taken place at a time when virtually the entire weight of opinion, not only in this country
but also abroad, was in favour of the expansion of financial services. Indeed, just before the
financial turmoil broke out in the summer of 2007, there was a debate in New York about the
need to follow London’s example of unfettered markets if they were not to lose ground.
What are the lessons for central banks?
With the passage of the new Banking Act last month, the Bank of England now has two
objectives enshrined in statute: monetary stability and financial stability. Events of the past
six months show that there are limits to what can be achieved in respect of either objective.
No policy framework can, or should be expected to, stabilise output when demand in the rest
of the world suddenly and simultaneously “falls off a cliff”, to use the expression heard so
often in recent months. Even the safety valve of a floating exchange rate cannot insulate an
economy from its trading partners. World trade fell by around 5% in the final quarter of 2008.
54 of the 56 nations for which data are available for the fourth quarter registered falls in
industrial output. 7 of those suffered double digit declines. For many years trade has been
the route to faster growth. Now trade is leading the world down as the economies most
adversely affected by the current downturn are those most dependent on exports, such as
Japan and some of the other Asian economies, not those with the worst banking problems.
Sharp changes in sentiment, confidence, animal spirits – whatever words you care to use –
are capable of wreaking havoc on the world and our own economy.
I shall turn later to our immediate response to the crisis. I want first, however, to ask whether
central banks have the right instruments and the right policy frameworks to deal with a world
in which some of the biggest risks are of the type I have discussed earlier, namely events
which occur very infrequently but when they do so have large adverse effects; events such
as those through which we are living. In other words, was our framework suitable for a world
of stability but inadequate for preventing or responding to large adverse shocks?
In particular, should central banks continue to use their single monetary policy instrument –
in our case Bank Rate, supplemented when necessary by unconventional operations – to
aim solely at price stability, or should they aim also at wider financial stability objectives, as
some have suggested? For over fifteen years Bank Rate has been set to meet an inflation
target. And it was very successful in achieving that objective until commodity prices pushed
up inflation in 2007. Since the Monetary Policy Committee was established, the average
inflation rate has been only 0.1 percentage points away from the target. The strategy of
inflation targeting ensured that the MPC maintained a balance between overall demand and
supply in the economy.
We could, of course, have pursued a different policy. We could have set interest rates
consistently at a higher level in order to lower the growth of domestic demand below the rate
at which inflation was stable and close to the target. In the words of my predecessor, we
could have rejected the approach of accepting “unbalanced growth rather than no growth”.
But to argue that Bank Rate should have been set to achieve not price stability but other
objectives would have meant accepting rising unemployment and falling inflation. And that
would not have altered long-term interest rates in world capital markets and “irrational
exuberance” in financial markets in the US and elsewhere. If we want to slow the growth of
the financial sector balance sheet, and most of the expansion of credit in recent years was
within the financial sector, we can surely do better than raising Bank Rate to a level that
undermines the real economy and our commitment to the inflation target.

BIS Review 32/2009

5

As Chairman Bernanke rightly emphasised last week, one of the causes of the crisis was the
impact of the growing current account imbalances on financial intermediation in the main
deficit countries, the US and the UK. The large and persistent inflows of capital lowered
market interest rates to extremely low levels and encouraged the “search for yield”. In
response, the financial services industry rediscovered the time-honoured way of raising rates
of return – increasing leverage and taking more risk while finding ways of making the degree
of risk less transparent. The crisis resulted from the interaction between the “micro”
behaviour of banks and other institutions in creating new financial assets and the “macro”
economic strategies pursued by the world’s major countries. If we are to make crises less
likely in future we will need to concentrate on policies covering these interactions.
The size to which the current account imbalances were allowed to grow reflected the fact that
the international monetary system, such as it is, placed no pressures on surplus countries
and that the main debtor country issued the world’s reserve currency. Year after year
international meetings expressed surprise, and indeed concern, that the imbalances
continued to accumulate, but in the absence of a correction the theme became a worn
groove in discussions and interest waned. The more forcefully the warnings were expressed,
the more they were ignored, precisely because each country appeared able on its own to
achieve price stability and steady growth despite the continued build-up of the imbalances.
The consequences of this are now evident: a severe global downturn affecting virtually every
country in the world. In a world of imbalances it is just as dangerous to rely too heavily on
foreign demand for goods and services as it is to rely excessively on foreign borrowing.
Surely now no country can be indifferent to the objective of improving the consistency of our
macroeconomic strategies. So I hope that the debate about the need for symmetric
obligations on surplus and debtor countries alike will move on from previous unsuccessful
dialogues stretching back to the Bretton Woods conference in 1944.
Turning to the “micro” cause of the crisis, a root cause was a degree of over optimism in
financial markets. History, whether the run up to the 1929 stock market crash or more
recently in the dotcom mania, suggests that only very substantial rises in short-term interest
rates will bring to an end the excessive speculation, and that such rises bring about the very
recession which the policy is designed to avert.
What is needed is an additional instrument, or possibly a set of instruments, to provide the
authorities with the ability to control the growth of the financial sector and its interactions with
the wider economy. A set of counter-cyclical policy instruments is the right response to the
dilemma of trying to use Bank Rate to control both inflation and excessive expansion of the
financial sector. It provides the “top-down” judgement for prudential supervision that I
described earlier, but detailed work is needed to flesh out that general principle.
How should we deal with the present crisis?
I have spoken so far about the long-term lessons of the crisis for the structure of banking and
its regulation. But the immediate need is to deal with the extraordinarily steep and
simultaneous downturn in so many economies around the world, and to stabilise the banking
system in those countries where it has failed. That should be the main priority at the
forthcoming G20 Summit.
There are three parts to the required policy response. First, there is an urgent need for a
collective commitment by all the countries in the G20 to restore confidence. Second, in those
countries where the banking system has failed, there must be a credible promise that banks
will be restructured and recapitalised so that they can resume their normal functions and
support the flow of credit to their own and other economies. Third, we need to identify and
explain a coherent exit strategy through which all of the unprecedented official policy actions
can be unwound and which provides a bridge back to stability.

6

BIS Review 32/2009

A joint commitment to a macroeconomic stimulus – the division between monetary and fiscal
measures is a matter for individual countries to determine – is required to ensure a growth of
nominal demand sufficient to reverse the extraordinarily steep and simultaneous downturn in
output around the world. Much has already been done. But the measures need to add up to
a collective determination to support an adequate level of money spending, and will need to
include actions to help poorer countries borrow either from the IMF or on world capital
markets.
Without that collective commitment, countries may neglect the beneficial effects that their
policy actions can have on other countries, resulting in an excessively cautious approach.
The G20 summit in London in two weeks time offers an opportunity and a challenge. The
occasions on which the words and actions of policy-makers really matter are probably fewer
than many of us care to admit. But this is one of them. And I was encouraged by an unusual
sense of determination at the G20 Ministerial Meeting at the weekend to show a collective
commitment to deal with our problems.
In the UK we are already taking unprecedented action to boost nominal spending. The
Government announced a temporary fiscal stimulus in the Pre-Budget Report in November.
Bank Rate has been reduced by 4½ percentage points in the past six months. And this
month the Bank began a series of asset purchases aimed at boosting the supply of money in
the economy directly. In due course, this will act to expand money spending. In its entire 300
year history, the Bank of England has never acted so swiftly or extensively in response to an
economic downturn.
The second aspect of the required policy response is effective stabilisation of the banking
system. The experience of those countries that have most successfully resolved banking
problems, such as Sweden in the early 1990s, suggests that that will require uncertainty
about the values of some of the more opaque assets on bank balance sheets to be dispelled.
It will take many months to audit forensically the true state of those balance sheets and for
some of the underlying macroeconomic uncertainty to dissipate. In the meantime
governments have to stabilise the banking system by reassuring creditors in order to prevent
the risk of either retail or wholesale runs of the kind we saw in the Panic of 2008. They have
to subscribe sufficient equity capital – plain ordinary equity – in order to underpin the capital
position of banks in the event of future losses. Although there are different ways to do this
(splitting banks, insuring pools of assets), they all have in common a commitment to provide
contingent capital to banks so that core equity capital does not fall below some minimum
ratio and so creditors are protected. It follows that governments must be prepared to hold
whatever proportion of equity capital turns out to be necessary.
The final part of the policy response relates to the longer term. There needs to be a clear exit
route by which the extraordinary level of official financial support will be unwound as
conditions return to normal. And there needs to be a credible commitment to implement the
longer term reforms. For monetary policy, the inflation target provides a natural guide to
when, and by how much, the extraordinary degree of policy stimulus should be withdrawn. In
particular, the outlook for inflation will determine when and by how much asset purchases are
in due course reversed and the timing of a return of interest rates to more normal levels. For
fiscal policy, there needs to be a credible plan for consolidation of deficits and debt in the
future contingent on the state of the economy. And in terms of support to the banking sector,
governments should signal their commitment to return banks to the private sector once
balance sheets have been restructured. In the UK that will be underpinned by UKFI
formulating an explicit mechanism through which the Government’s shares can in due course
be sold back to the private sector.
There will also, eventually, need to be a way to scale back the extraordinary levels of liquidity
support provided by central banks during the crisis. The Bank of England has lent, and
continues to lend, over £300 billion pounds through our repo operations and the Special
Liquidity Scheme. And a backstop of further liquidity support is still available if the system

BIS Review 32/2009

7

requires it through our discount window. The Federal Reserve has lent more than $900
billion dollars, and the ECB around €700bn. Relative to GDP, the balance sheet of the three
central banks has broadly doubled during the crisis. But in providing this support, central
banks cannot offer long-term funding and should not offer support against assets that are
unlikely to have a viable future in the absence of official intervention. At some point central
bank balance sheets will need to contract.
Finally, although I have stressed the need to take time to think through carefully the long run
reforms required, we need to commit now, while the political will exists, to a process for
decisions on long-term reforms in key areas such as bank regulation, reform of the
international monetary system and the governance of international financial institutions.
Conclusions
Why did no one see this crisis coming? In fact, most of the underlying causes of the crisis
attracted attention from economists, central banks, international financial institutions and
regulators. But the difficulty of overcoming coordination or collective action problems meant
that nothing was done. Banks felt that they had to keep on dancing while the music was
playing. Regulators could never prove that the risks they identified would crystallize, and the
“top down” and “bottom up” dimensions of prudential supervision were not married. Central
banks and the IMF discussed the imbalances for so long that some came to believe that they
were crying wolf. And no one country could prevent the world wide increase in asset prices.
Christopher Fildes’ law of the financial cycle says that “disasters happen when the last man
who can remember what happened last time has retired”. Periods of euphoria and panics in
the financial system are inherent features of a market economy. They are the cost we pay for
the benefits of a market economy – long-run increases in our standard of living which other
systems have failed to deliver. After another twenty years or so, memories of the Panic of
2008 will have faded, and the regulations put in place in its wake will no doubt be seen as
old-fashioned, inhibiting of the potential of the City, and as ripe to be swept away as was the
Glass-Steagall separation of commercial and investment banking in the United States a few
years ago.
A lesson of history is that few generations have been able to avoid a repetition of earlier
banking crises. The essential problem is that we can no more bind our successors than our
predecessors were able to bind us. Rare events, even when dramatic at the time, lose their
power to shape policy as memory recedes. The role of institutions is to retain a collective
memory and to resist the temptations of the present. That is one of the most important roles
of a central bank. It is accepted as such in the domain of monetary policy. And there is an
equivalent role in financial stability.
The introduction of simple and robust policy tools into a regulatory regime based on the
exercise of constrained discretion would make it easier to resist overly rapid expansion of
financial institutions. In particular, the authorities should maintain a clear focus on the issues
that matter when the worst occurs – liquidity and leverage. It should be intrusive, in the sense
of knowing what is going on, but not bureaucratic. A system in which it is easier for a large
bank to expand and then destroy its balance sheet than for an individual to open a bank
account has lost focus. That is not the fault of regulators, but a reflection of the pressures
and incentives they have faced – from all of us.
As a Kennedy Scholar at Harvard, I have always treasured Harold Macmillan’s words in his
tribute to John F Kennedy. He was, said Macmillan, a man “whose eyes were on the horizon
but whose feet were on the ground". In re-designing the regulatory framework we certainly
need to keep our feet on the ground, and we should also keep our eyes on the horizon, both
ahead of and behind us.
More urgent, however, is the immediate task of generating an economic recovery. Most of us
come from the generation that grew up believing that mass unemployment and world

8

BIS Review 32/2009

recession were things of the past, relevant to the history books but not the textbooks. That
assumption is under threat. We must rise to the challenge.

BIS Review 32/2009

9

Paul Tucker: The Turner Review Conference – comments occasioned by
the Turner Review
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at The Turner Review
Conference, London, 27 March 2009.
*

*

*

The dreadful crisis affecting the international economy and financial system will rightly
prompt a thorough re-examination of principles and structures: the “rules of the game” for
global finance. There will be many reports. As after the 1987 stock market crash and after
the 1990s’ EME crises, they will be rich in analysis, proposals and plans. The Turner Report
is an early distinguished intervention, taking its place alongside, for example, the reports
from Paul Volker’s G30 Committee and Jacques Larosière’s European group.
We would be foolhardy not to start thinking about the shape of the system we want, and we
should take the quick wins. But it might well be a mistake to reach early conclusions on the
truly big issues. Before this crisis is over, we could well learn quite a lot more about which
business models and risk management practices worked best; and about how effectively the
current efforts to stabilise banking systems and stimulate nominal demand work to revive our
economies. We will then be in a better position to make judgments about just how much we
need to constrain financial activity in the future in the interests of stability.
My own working definition of “financial stability” has long been as follows. It is to do with
money. It starts with monetary policy being directed, of course, to ensuring that the value of
central bank money in terms of goods and services is stable. But most money in economies
everywhere is private money: deposits with commercial banks. In significant degree, financial
stability is about safeguarding the stability of private money (deposits with the banking
system) relative to central bank money. Prosaically, depositors with banks have to be
confident that they can exchange their deposits at face value for our money – our notes; or
that they can switch to another bank where they can be confident of that. At the level of the
system, we need an “exchange rate” of unity for private money and central bank money. And
we need wholesale funders of banks to be confident of that too. When that is secured,
demand for our money is low, and society reaps the efficiency benefits of the private sector
banking system. Absent that confidence, the payments system simply would not work. And
the supply of credit would be imperilled, as we have rediscovered to the global economy’s
great cost. These objectives – price stability, and banking system stability – are the two key
facets of stability in a monetary economy. As recent events show, they can be affected
profoundly by conditions in capital markets and in overseas financial systems. Focusing
ultimately on the stability of our monetary system therefore clearly requires a broad view of
financial markets more generally.
Stability in the elemental sense I have described was profoundly threatened last autumn –
when the universal crisis of confidence triggered by Lehmans’ failure tore the fabric of
international commerce. That stability has been sustained owes everything to governments
stepping in, effectively being prepared to borrow from the future in order to prop up the
banking system now. In that sense, we are, of course, “beyond Financial Stability”, insofar
as, ordinarily, we would regard instability as a state of affairs that requires such support.
The Turner Report rehearses the analysis of how we got to that point. It rightly places weight
on the baleful effects of persistent and cumulative global current and capital account
imbalances. I dearly wish that the international authorities had taken on board the lessons
from the 1990s EME crises about the vital importance of monitoring, and where necessary
managing, national balance sheets – for large countries as well as EMEs. It is striking,
however, that other analysts, including recently from the IMF, are starting to play down the
part played by the international monetary system. I do not go along with that. There can

BIS Review 39/2009

1

surely be no disputing that macroeconomic imbalances have mattered greatly to the crisis,
as they contributed to the build up of debt and, through the compression of risk-free rates
and risk premia, the appreciation of asset prices. But in acknowledging that, we do not have
to claim that of themselves such imbalances lead inevitably to financial instability. A
necessary condition, in my view, is for faultlines to exist within the financial system itself –
and the deeper they run, the greater will be the threat to stability. The identification and
mitigation of such faultlines requires engagement with the details of the system. Those who
argue that it is all down to global imbalances and that we did not need to know about
leverage via CDOs and the shadow banking system and so on are equally wrong. But the
scale of the macroeconomic imbalances that were allowed to accumulate surely raised the
bar for resilience of the financial system, and probably beyond what was reasonable. We
need to quit pointing the finger, alternatively, at global macroeconomic and financial system
causes, and accept that it was both. The Turner Report does that.
A few points on micro regulation
The Report and accompanying FSA Discussion Paper’s principal focus is, of course, micro
regulation. I have just three points to add or emphasise on that this morning.
Effective prudential supervision of individual firms relies on the line supervisors being
prepared to substitute their views for those of management when they have good reason to
believe that the viability or stability of a bank otherwise may be in peril. They need the
confidence, when necessary, to face down management, and even boards; and also to be
prepared to take the risk of being overruled on appeal. A respected, self-confident but
restrained line supervisor, with the forensic skills to get to the heart of things, can do a very
great deal for stability. It is terrific that Adair and Hector are renewing the emphasis on line
supervision. (But, by the way, when supervisors do their job, their achievements are invisible
and they get no thanks.)
Second, it is important to remember that most bank failures have their roots in large or
concentrated exposures. This crisis is in some respects no exception. It is, therefore, good
news for the future that, ahead of this crisis, the EU was already planning to extend the bar
on large credit exposures to interbank deposits. Line supervisors must additionally look for
concentrated exposures to sectors or instruments; to give just one of many possible
examples, large holdings of super-senior CDO tranches just might have been a pointer to the
vulnerabilities at some large internationally active banks. And the possibility of fateful
concentrations in bank funding structures should be given similar weight. If all that requires
more reporting by banks, it would be worth it.
Third, effective prudential supervision is seriously impeded by complex group structures.
That was a headline lesson from the failure of BCCI nearly two decades ago; and EU
Directives were amended to make unsupervisable structures a ground for withholding or
withdrawing authorisation, and so for exercising regulatory powers. But complexity is not just
a convenient shield for wickedness. It can also make it hard for management and
supervisors to figure out what is going on in a perfectly honest business. The explosion of
what I referred to a couple of years ago as Vehicular Finance, with committed credit lines
and reputational risk constituting umbilical cords back to parent or sponsoring banks, was
precisely a manifestation of that variety of obfuscatory complexity. Supervisors around the
world should not allow it. And, related to that, as the Turner Report rightly says, supervisors
should get serious about working together on the oversight and regulation of international
groups. The long-standing challenges of consolidated supervision are unfinished business,
more than thirty years after the first Basel Concordat.

2

BIS Review 39/2009

Micro-to-macroprudential
Those issues, and even more those of capital and liquidity, shade into the debate about
macroprudential oversight and regulation.
One explanation of the parlous state of the industrialised world banking system is that too
many banks had made too many rotten individual-loan underwriting decisions. Quite plainly
there was some of that: for example, manifestly in the US subprime market, in commercial
property, and probably in some Leveraged Buy Outs. It would be the job of the authorities’
bank examiners, as they are termed elsewhere, to detect significant erosion in the quality of
individual portfolios or underwriting standards, and get it fixed before it overwhelmed the
system.
Another, not mutually exclusive, explanation is that by virtue of holding large “trading” books
that were marked to market, banks found themselves having to make very large portfolio
write downs in the face of sharp rises in liquidity premia in asset markets. As highly-levered
institutions – as banks are unavoidably: deposits are debt – those mark-downs depleted their
net worth to the point of imperilling solvency. That caused a retrenchment in the availability of
credit, helping to plunge the world economy into recession, and so impairing traditional loan
books, in a vicious spiral. The point of this account is that it emphasises the role of banks’
leverage. Combined with maturity transformation, this unavoidably makes banks brittle. And
that underlines just why our predecessors placed such great weight on the safety and
soundness of banks. Indeed, the original reason for regulating capital was that an assurance
of capital adequacy, for all but the most extreme circumstances, would make runs less likely.
But that was hardly meant to lead to the neglect of liquidity highlighted a few years ago by
one of my predecessors, Andrew Large, and others.
Liquidity
We therefore welcome the Turner Report’s exploration of “core funding”. And we very much
support, and have encouraged, the FSA’s plan that all banks should in future hold a
minimum level of high-quality government bonds, on the grounds that only they carry a
reasonable assurance of market liquidity in stressed conditions. I hope the same approach
can be adopted internationally. Further, supervisors should be vigilant in ensuring that banks’
so-called “treasury” or “liquidity” portfolios are not concentrated in funding instruments, such
as FRNs, issued by other banks. That turns out to have been all too prevalent. And they
were not liquid when the music stopped. Years ago, regulators decided to deduct banks’
holdings of each other’s capital-instruments, to avoid the system as a whole generating
illusory capital. The same principle could perhaps apply in liquidity regulation.
The authorities also need to be clear about what level of stress, and/or what proportion of
short-term liabilities, the stock liquidity buffer must cover. That must be a judgment for the
authorities; and it must, as the Turner Report makes clear, be more demanding than in the
past. But just as important, we must not imagine that the kind of modelling that can be
applied to, say, credit risk and, perhaps, to some types of market risk can sensibly be carried
across to liquidity risk. Liquidity goes wrong when there is, in the jargon, strategic interaction:
I run (or sell) because I think you will etc. Liquidity buffers need to sustain confidence; if
successful, the buffer is never needed. A time series of data showing low use of a liquidity
buffer is not compelling evidence that a requirement was too high. Our successors must
remember that in 10-20 years time.
Of course, no liquidity buffer can be proof against all circumstances. Which is why central
banks are in the business of providing liquidity insurance to the system. That insurance
needs to be provided on terms that do not incite imprudent liquidity risks, and that are time
consistent, in the sense that we avoid needing to recast our regime when really difficult times
hit. The Bank set out its approach in the paper we issued last autumn on the launch of our
Discount Window Facility, through which we stand ready to lend against a wide range of

BIS Review 39/2009

3

collateral at pre-determined fees to banks that are not facing fundamental problems of
solvency or viability.
Capital, and capital-of-last-resort
I have talked about liquidity partly because, as our community returns to thinking about bank
supervision in terms of stability as well as consumer protection, it needs to be centre stage
again; but also because we can think about capital regulation under the same broad
headings. What should count as capital; what risks should it protect against; and what
happens when the system turns out not to have enough capital?
On the definition of capital, I agree with the Turner Report that what matters to stability is
common equity (and possibly, subject to further analysis, also instruments that can
unambiguously be converted into common equity at the option of the bank or regulator). That
is because confidence in a bank as a going concern is crucial to the stability of its deposit
and wholesale funding base. Subordinated debt may well help to protect depositors in the
event of liquidation, but it cannot absorb losses on a going-concern basis and so does little to
avoid the incentive to run or, therefore, the slide into resolution. Nor does subordinated debt
alter the position of retail depositors, who can look to the deposit-protection scheme,
especially now that it provides 100% cover up to £50,000. Subordinated debt can enhance
recoveries made by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme. But it is not directly
stability-enhancing. The composition of regulatory capital was allowed to become too
complicated. Including debt instruments is effectively to allow double leverage. The Basel
Committee is itself returning to this question.
As with liquidity, I do not want to say much today about how to measure the risks that capital
should cover. I applaud the Turner Report’s analysis of “trading book” risks; as discussed in
the Bank’s Financial Stability Review a few years ago, making Value at Risk the bedrock of
market risk requirements allows capital to fall, or leverage to rise, during periods of unusually
low volatility. The Basel Committee are addressing this. More generally, the degree of stress
that capital should enable banks to withstand, whether against default risk or market risk,
should be decided by the authorities not by individual banks, precisely because of the
systemic significance of banks to the payments and credit system. Even when individual
banks look adequately capitalised taken in isolation, the aggregate position may be more
vulnerable taking into account common exposures to credit, market or liquidity risk, and
cross-system exposures. Capital requirements for individual firms may, therefore, need to
depend on how liquidity mismatched and how leveraged the system as a whole is.
Even so, just as with liquidity, there will be rare episodes, which we must strive to make very
rare, where there is a capital deficiency in individually significant banks, or even in the
system as a whole. And, again analogously, we therefore need ex ante policies for catering
with that.
There are two elements to such policies.
First, we need regimes for resolving distressed banks in an orderly way, outside of the
insolvency regime applying to ordinary companies. The UK has taken a useful step forward
in introducing a Special Resolution Regime for banks. We will need to keep its provisions
under active review.
Large and Complex Financial Institutions present a special challenge. Nearly a decade ago,
a joint G10/Financial Stability Group, on which I served, articulated the imponderable scale of
the challenge of winding up such a group. The conclusion was that it lay beyond the current
capability of the authorities internationally; but that, nevertheless, we should work together –
providing factbooks on firms and exchanging information – to put ourselves in the best
possible position. None of that was done, and the FSF and G20 are, thankfully, now again
underlining how vitally important it is. We need in particular to ensure that financial groups
maintain information on the assets and liabilities of their legal entities; it is legal entities that

4

BIS Review 39/2009

go into resolution not business divisions. Lehmans shouts that out loud and clear. We need
to ensure that banks, however grand they are, keep information that would facilitate rapid
payout from deposit-protection schemes. We need banks to have contingency funding plans
that are shared with regulators and central banks. We need, more ambitiously, to address
Too Big To Fail. And we need to do just massively better at working together internationally.
However much we do, I fear that the inescapable conclusion will be that we cannot rule out
that very rarely the banking system will end up needing to be supported by some ultimate
source of capital. If that is right, then society needs principles and policies for what might be
called “Capital of Last Resort”, to sit alongside the Lender of Last Resort (LOLR) principles
developed by and for central banks since the 19th century. Parts of the academic community
have started to think about and advocate capital-insurance from the private sector, but over
the long term we need to decide whether or not to have a policy for public sector capital
insurance. At a high level, this faces exactly the challenges of central bank liquidity
insurance. Its terms must not incentivise imprudent behaviour; and they must be time
consistent. These were exactly the challenges faced by the Bank in articulating the terms of
its Discount Window Facility. But the challenges are even greater in this area because the
exit strategy from capital injections is so much more difficult; by potentially delivering control,
capital-insurance is much more closely intertwined with issues of management; and because
there would have to be clarity about treatment of all parts of the capital structure.
I think that articulating and sticking to policies in this area will be one of the great challenges
over the coming years and decades.
Macroprudential: taming the credit cycle
It would all be a lot easier if we could tame the credit cycle. This is the debate about the
missing “macroprudential instrument”. What would be the objective; is there in principle an
instrument; would it work in practice in a world of free capital flows? Those debates are prior
to questions of institutional responsibility. And they have a bearing on the parallel debate
about the regulatory boundary, which is where I will begin.
I start from the position that excessive leverage and maturity transformation in parts of the
non-bank financial sector – funds, conduits, securities dealers, and so on – was predicated
on the availability of plentiful credit on too-easy terms from the commercial banking system.
Up to a point, the same goes for liquidity in asset markets. Of course, persistently strong
demand for financial assets – crudely, rising prices – created an illusion of liquidity but,
beyond that, the willingness and terms on which “market-makers” underpinned liquidity
depended on their access to credit to finance inventory. And the ultimate private sector
providers of such credit are commercial banks.
One big question, therefore, is how far we could get in dampening the credit cycle by
focusing on the provision of liquidity, and so leverage, by banks to other financial firms. That
goes to whether hedge funds and other vehicles need to be brought within the net. Frankly, it
is hard to know whether, internationally, the regulatory community tried and failed to control
the leverage available to the non-bank financial sector; or whether it was not really attempted
taking into account system-wide conditions. Either way, more information from non-banks
would probably be needed to make such a policy workable.
But a second question, perhaps the biggest, is whether “dampening the credit cycle” should
be the goal at all; or, alternatively, whether it is a realistic goal. A very slightly more modest –
but, in truth, still demanding – objective might be to concentrate on making banks themselves
more resilient to economic or market shocks, so that it is less likely that they expose banking
system fragility that amplifies an economic downturn.
A third big question is about instruments. Lots of candidates are canvassed. Dynamic
provisioning under which banks would, in the manner of previous generations, set aside
general provisions as loan books grew. Capital requirements that increased with the rate of

BIS Review 39/2009

5

growth of balance sheets, or some measure of incipient stress. Variable margin requirements
on the terms of credit provided to financial, or even real-economy, borrowers.
A fourth big question is whether the chosen instrument(s), whatever it is, could be operated
by rules or would require an element of top-down judgment. On that, I am inclined to the view
that our community is unlikely to be able to write down a suitably robust rule. I have two
reasons for that. One draws a parallel with monetary policy. The history of monetary policy,
not least in this country, is littered with failed attempts to design an optimal rule, giving way to
efforts to constrain the discretion of policymakers making judgments. I cannot see why we
would be any better at developing rules for financial stability. As the structure of the financial
system evolved, we would need to adapt the rule and would probably fail to spot the need to
do so. But there is also something about the nature of financial stability problems that makes
“rules” implausible to me. In the upswing of the credit cycle, there is often a collective-action
problem. Even though individual banks may perceive risk as underpriced, not knowing for
sure whether or when the party will end they hesitate to step off the rollercoaster for fear of
damaging their business franchise. This is precisely why it is the job of the authorities to
“take away the punchbowl as the party gets going”. I just cannot see how we could calibrate
ex ante rules for the increase in capital requirements or whatever that would be needed to do
that, but we would of course need somehow to find a way of sensibly constraining the
discretion at the core of the alternative approach.
Even if we could resolve all those issues, a fifth big issue is how far individual national
authorities would be able to operate in this field on their own, given free flows of capital
internationally and cross-border banking.
These big questions are, of course, inter-related. Most obviously, how far we could get in
designing an instrument(s) and a process for its deployment will affect whether the objective
should be to ameliorate the effects of economic shocks on the banks or also the effects of
the credit-creation process on the economy. And the objective will have a bearing on whether
it is host or home authorities who need to constrain a bank’s lending growth. That is a
formidable agenda, and it underlines just how much there is to do.
Macroprudential: markets and infrastructure as part of the transmission mechanism
But if we are to deliver and maintain stability, a macroprudential agenda cannot focus only on
countercyclical capital (or margin) requirements. We need to focus on how large shocks
might be transmitted through the financial system.
Again, there is an analogy with monetary policy. Effective monetary policy relies upon a rich
and subtle understanding of the structure of the economy and how our policy decisions are
transmitted to our final goals (the so-called “monetary transmission mechanism”).
Equivalently, effective delivery of a financial stability mandate requires a rich and subtle
understanding of the structure of the domestic and international financial system, and how
developments in one part are transmitted to others. That means our range must continue to
extend beyond banks to the capital markets and the financial infrastructure.
The analogy does not stop there. In the monetary sphere, policymakers in the 1980s and
1990s urged reforms to make the real economy, especially labour markets, more flexible, as
that would reduce the burden on monetary policy in smoothing cyclical fluctuations. The
analogue in the financial stability sphere is that the authorities need to help to identify and,
crucially, remedy faultlines in the financial system. Whereas for monetary policy we want
real-economy flexibility, for financial stability we want financial system resilience. And just as
the monetary policy transmission mechanism evolves, so the structure of the financial
system changes. The explosion of Vehicular Finance and the development of credit trading
are just two recent examples that affected the current crisis. We therefore need a very highquality, continuous assessment of emerging vulnerabilities in the system as a whole, and
how it would behave under stress.

6

BIS Review 39/2009

Internationally the official community has not distinguished itself on that front over recent
years. Just three examples; there are more, I fear.
First, there were too many large financial businesses for which an AAA rating was, fatally,
more than a description of their credit standing; it constituted their business model. Examples
include Fannie and Freddie; the Landesbanks; the US monoline insurers; the SIVs; and, if
they can be thought to have a business model, the ABCPs. These institutions distorted the
supply of credit across the global economy. (In the case of the monoline insurers, for
structured finance they were effectively in the business of providing “end-of-the-world
insurance with a settlement period of T+1”.)
An even wider group of private-sector AAA institutions were not required to collateralise
derivatives-related counterparty-credit exposures. The effect for the system as a whole was
to introduce an extraordinary vulnerability to a ratings downgrade of any of these institutions
or structures. There was, in effect, a potentially systemic cliff.
A second serious faultline in global capital markets – arguably the greatest – was the firm
expectation of “no break the buck” in the massive global Money Market Mutual Fund
industry; c. $3trn in the US, more or less the same size as commercial bank deposits. The
failure to pay par at a major US money fund when Lehman collapsed helped trigger the
unravelling of confidence across global markets. Constant net-asset value MMMFs have
perhaps been, globally, the most important non-bank banks lying outside the scope of what I
like to call the banking Social Contract: no prudential supervision, no “deposit” insurance, no
access to the discount window, and yet nevertheless allowed to conduct maturity
transformation and offer payments services. Although smaller in Europe than in the US, this
industry does exist over here; the ECB even include money funds in their definition of
monetary institutions and so in measures of broad money. But there is the added twist that
during the boom a large part of their assets comprised bank CDs and conduit ABCP. In other
words, they have essentially been an intermediary between the banks and corporate
treasurers, insurance companies etc, who fund banks at one remove. As Paul Volker’s G30
report concludes, we need to review whether or not to continue to allow Constant NAV
MMMFs; the alternative would be that they convert either into variable NAV funds (ie like any
other mutual fund) or into regulated deposit-takers.
A third faultline may have been the extension of mark-to-market accounting to (more or less)
everyone or everything without attention to how the dynamics of the system as a whole
would be affected. If liquidity premia can fluctuate materially, the effects on portfolio values
can be material, increasing or reducing leverage and affecting risk-seeking or shedding
behaviour. Accounting measures then become actors rather than purely passive measures.
This is a world away from only a small handful of dealers marking to market. My point here is
not that marking to market is necessarily flawed, but rather that the “rules of the game” for
global finance matter. It is really no good anyone arguing against that: the debate needs to
move on and, thanks to the Financial Stability Forum, probably is.
The moral of this story is that the details of the structure of our capital markets matter to
stability. They may matter only in the event of very low probability shocks to the system. But
policymakers must focus on containing the impact of such tail events. Systemic resilience is
as much a part of a macroprudential approach as countercyclical capital requirements.
This is not just a matter of picking out those features of the system we should dislike. It
should occasionally, but with restraint, be as much about what we do want. The current
topical issue is whether CDS contracts, or vanilla OTC contracts, should be centrally cleared
and exchange-traded. Ideally yes, which will underline the importance of the integrity of
central counterparty risk management, and systemic oversight by the authorities. But the
broader issue is that the authorities should be ready to nudge intermediaries, asset
managers and infrastructure providers into those market-development initiatives that are
clearly desirable in the interests of stability but need not harm efficiency.

BIS Review 39/2009

7

Put another way, the “plumbing” matters. We have positive reasons, as well as negative
ones, for believing that. Two examples. Fifteen to twenty years ago, central banks moved
wholesale payment systems on to a Real-Time Gross Settlement basis. Cutting through the
details, this meant that settlement banks are no longer exposed to each other during the day
for the payments they send each other; and, in the UK and most other countries, the central
bank delivers this without taking unsecured intra-day credit exposures itself. Without those
unheralded reforms, I have little doubt that last autumn’s crisis would have been calamitous
on a scale massively exceeding the dreadful near-seizure we did experience in the money
markets. That example was a public sector initiative; the banks were more or less herded
into it. But there is an equally important private sector initiative. Without the collateralisation
of OTC-derivative counterparty credit exposures, the credit spillovers from firm and fund
failures around the world would surely have been much greater.
What those two examples demonstrate is that the authorities and practitioners can get things
right – when we focus on what will matter in bad states of the world.
Summary
The Turner Report makes a big contribution to developing the agenda for reforming the
global financial system, including on macroprudential oversight. If anything, I may have
added to that agenda this morning.
We need to undertake serious research and analysis on whether we can develop a macro
instrument for taming the credit cycle.
But, in making the system more resilient, we cannot rely solely on bank capital or loan
market requirements. That endeavour – heading-off incipient stress, and keeping the “rules
of the game” up to date and fit for purpose – requires high-quality surveillance of the system
as a whole, bringing together analysis, experience and intelligence on markets, the macro
environment, the infrastructure, firms. We have to identify and address faultlines. The
system’s strengths and weak points “morph” over time. One era’s solution may be today’s or
tomorrow’s faultline: Fannie Mae is an example of that. And, for when those efforts fail, we
need to be clearer about how the authorities will intervene to preserve stability, and whether
we can construct a “capital of last resort” policy that does not create perverse incentives
during “peacetime”.
Surveillance, building system resilience, crisis management. A macroprudential approach to
stability has to do rather more than bring together a central bank’s macroeconomists and a
micro regulator’s line supervisors. What lies in between matters hugely: markets, payment
systems, the plumbing. I should like to think that, amongst others, central banks can bring
something to this, drawing on our conjunctural expertise, but also on our operational
presence in money and bond markets and at the heart of the payments and settlements
system. Certainly the Bank will engage actively with the FSA, HMT, overseas central banks,
and the industry in designing new “rules of the game” for the global financial system.

8

BIS Review 39/2009

Spencer Dale: Tough times, unconventional measures
Remarks by Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of
England, at the Association of British Insurers Economics and Research Conference,
London, 27 March 2009.
I would like to thank Rohan Churm, Alan Mankikar and Tim Taylor for their considerable help in preparing these
remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary
Policy Committee.

*

*

*

The UK economy is in a deep recession. Output in the United Kingdom fell at its fastest rate
in nearly thirty years in the final quarter of last year, and a similar fall in output in the first
quarter of this year appears likely. We are in the throes of a synchronised global downturn,
which has spread far and wide.
But the darkest hour is just before the dawn. Although immediate prospects appear bleak,
the substantial economic stimulus that is underway means that there are grounds for thinking
that economic conditions may start to improve later this year. An important part of that
stimulus stems from the extraordinary measures taken by the Monetary Policy Committee
over the past six months, including our decision to start using unconventional policy
measures.
Today, I will describe my view of the economic outlook and outline the factors that I believe
will spur a gradual turnaround in our economy. And I will explain why, earlier this month, the
Committee voted to use unconventional policy measures: how they will work and how we will
monitor their effectiveness.
I am delighted to have the opportunity to discuss these issues at the Association of British
Insurers. The insurance industry is a key part of the UK economy and of the financial sector
in particular. Indeed, it accounts for a third of all the jobs in the UK financial sector. Your
industry, like virtually every other sector of the UK economy, is being affected by the
recession. And given your members’ significant holdings of gilts and corporate bonds, it will
have a key role to play in the transmission of the unconventional policy measures recently
begun by the Committee.
1.

The economic outlook

The causes of the current recession can be traced back to at least the summer of 2007. The
fallout from the sub-prime mortgage crisis and the resulting pressure on banks’ balance
sheets led to a sharp tightening in the price and availability of credit. And the first stages of
what became a renewed and prolonged surge in oil and other commodity prices began to
erode households’ spending power and eat into companies’ profit margins.
As a result, the UK economy gradually slowed through the end of 2007 and into the first half
of 2008. But the economic outlook took a dramatic turn for the worse in the autumn of last
year. That deterioration followed the failure of Lehman Brothers, which triggered the most
severe banking crisis for almost a century. Confidence in the very essence of banking – as
well as in individual financial institutions – was shaken to its core and measures of financial
market risk and uncertainty ballooned. The resulting contraction in the supply of credit has
had a significant impact on the ability of households and companies to borrow and spend.
But the nature of the downturn over the past six months cannot be explained solely in terms
of the direct effects of the collapse of Lehman Brothers on the supply of credit. The impact of
changes in credit conditions on investment and consumption decisions tends to be gradual,
as existing loans mature and new contracts are negotiated. This contrasts with the dramatic
pace at which economic activity and sentiment turned during the final quarter of last year.

BIS Review 46/2009

1

Output, orders and investment all fell precipitously in a matter of months. Moreover, the
downturn in economic activity was seemingly indiscriminate. Output in virtually every corner
of the world fell sharply, irrespective of a country’s exposure to sub-prime loans, the state of
its banking system, or its level of indebtedness. The effects of the shock were also felt far
beyond its epicentre in the financial sector. Manufacturing output has been particularly hard
hit, with UK manufacturing output estimated to have fallen by 4.9% in the fourth quarter of
last year; the largest quarterly fall for over thirty years. Many other countries have suffered
even larger falls: Japanese manufacturing output is estimated to have contracted by over
12% in Q4 and German manufacturing output by over 7%. World trade is estimated to have
fallen by over 6% in January alone.
The pace, breadth and spread of the global downturn suggest that tighter credit conditions
were not the only force at work. It seems clear that a pronounced and widespread collapse in
confidence also played a major role. With the failure of Lehman Brothers it became all too
apparent that the problems in the financial sector were more acute than had previously been
thought. This was compounded by the realisation that even the largest financial institutions
were not “too big to fail”. More fundamentally, the demise of Lehman Brothers may have led
to a questioning of policymakers’ ability to deal effectively with such unprecedented financial
turmoil. The view that the impact of the financial crisis would be largely restricted to the
exclusive confines of the Square Mile and Wall Street was dispelled once and for all.
Households and businesses cut back on their spending as it became increasingly apparent
that the effects of the financial crisis on the real economy were likely to be deeper and more
widespread than previously envisaged.
The impact of the tightening in the supply of bank credit and of the widespread collapse of
confidence was compounded by developments in the supply of trade credit. In previous
recessions, many large businesses in the UK were able to support smaller companies by
reducing payment times to companies further up the supply chain and by extending credit to
those further down. But pressures on corporate cash flows and the reduced availability of
bank credit may have limited the scope for larger companies to behave in this way in this
downturn. The Monetary Policy Committee, via its network of regional Agents, is monitoring
closely developments in the demand for and availability of trade credit.
The reduction in the availability of trade credit has been accompanied by a tightening in the
supply of credit insurance. This is at a time when the demand for such insurance is at its
highest. Similarly, heightened uncertainty about the global environment has increased the
demand for letters of credit from UK exporters.
These developments are understandable and predictable: the economic environment has
deteriorated markedly and as insurers you need to protect yourselves against future losses.
There is a limit to how much insurance premiums can be raised before they exceed the profit
margin associated with a particular transaction. Higher prices can have the same effect as
the complete withdrawal of supply.
I know that members of the ABI are working hard with Government and with business to
agree how best to meet these challenges. It is vital for the long-term success of both your
industry and our economy as a whole that a workable solution is found.
Where next for the UK economy?
The Monetary Policy Committee set out its latest economic outlook in the February Inflation
Report. That Report went to great pains to stress the considerable uncertainty surrounding
the prospects for the economy. Nobody can predict with any certainty how the UK economy,
or indeed the world economy, is likely to fare over the next year or so. So beware of anyone
that suggests otherwise.
With that warning in mind, let me outline my central economic outlook, which is broadly
similar to that described in the February Report. Near-term prospects are bleak. Output is
likely to contract further in the first half of this year, as a weakening labour market and

2

BIS Review 46/2009

concerns about job prospects weigh on consumption, companies run down their stocks and
scale back investment spending, and the synchronised slowing in world demand restrains
export growth. But as we go through 2009, I believe it is most likely that the pace at which
output is contracting will ease and that we will see some signs of recovery by around the turn
of this year.
This view is based on the substantial stimulus that is already starting to flow through the
pipelines of our economy. There has been a marked easing in global monetary and fiscal
policies; authorities around the world have also enacted substantial initiatives to revitalise the
global banking system; the sharp falls in commodity prices will boost households’ purchasing
power; and the marked depreciation in sterling should support demand, both at home and
abroad, for domestically produced output. The scale of this stimulus is significantly greater
than that seen at comparable stages of the recessions in the 1970s, 80s or 90s.
But to repeat, there is huge uncertainty about the precise form and timing of the recovery and
so this central path should be treated with a healthy degree of scepticism. In particular, I
think the risks around this central path are weighted to the downside, reflecting the possibility
that the actions taken by the authorities around the world to improve the availability of credit
and to restore business and consumer confidence are slow to take effect. So there may still
be more to do.
Learning from past recessions
When considering the likely scale and duration of this recession, it is natural to examine the
experience from past recessions. And simple comparisons with recent recessions are not
encouraging. For example, taking account of developments in Q1, output appears likely to
have fallen by more in the first few quarters of this recession than in any of the preceding
ones. But when making these comparisons, it is important to recognise that the parallels are
far from perfect. The causes of this downturn are very different from those of most recent
recessions and, as I have just described, the policy response on this occasion has been
much quicker and more decisive. There is also a third factor that needs to be borne in mind
when drawing lessons from history.
This is the first recession in the UK for nearly 20 years. The structure of our economy has
changed significantly since the early 1990s, and even more so since the early 1980s and
1970s. The UK economy has undergone extensive reforms and deregulation, and
businesses have been transformed by the implementation of new technology and the effects
of globalisation. It is hard to quantify precisely the various ways in which the structure of the
economy has changed. The appropriate data are not always available and it may be a long
time until the effects are discernible in aggregate economic statistics. Importantly, the
significance of some of these structural reforms may not be fully apparent until the economy
is subjected to a substantial shock.
For example, one consequence of globalisation is that supply chains around the world are far
more integrated. This is likely to have played an important role in the speed and
synchronisation of the world downturn, as the effects of falling demand in a few countries
were translated into lower orders and production in many in a matter of weeks. That
increased integration is also likely to affect the speed and nature of the recovery.
Similarly, the technology used to control and manage inventories has changed substantially
over the past twenty or thirty years. This may have enabled companies to run down their
stocks earlier in this recession than in previous downturns. And indeed there is evidence that
firms have already cut back aggressively on their stock levels. A corollary of this sharp
correction is that the stock cycle may be shorter lived than in previous recessions.
The behaviour of the labour market may also have changed. I have been struck by the
number of business people who tell me about the array of measures they have already taken
since their orders starting falling sharply last autumn. Wages have been frozen or even cut,

BIS Review 46/2009

3

hours have been reduced, working practices have been adjusted. To the extent that wages
and hours are now more flexible, the adjustment in employment may be less. But if it is
easier for companies to vary their labour force than in the past, much of this adjustment may
come through more quickly than in previous downturns.
It is hard to know at this stage how significant these structural changes will be in determining
the depth of the recession and the speed of the recovery. But the possibility that there has
been a material structural change in our economy highlights a further danger of viewing the
current recession through the prism of previous ones. The latest economic data on world
trade, output and unemployment are unmistakeably grim, but we must continually challenge
ourselves about how to interpret these and the economic data to come. They could be telling
us something about the causes and size of the downturn, the impact of the policy measures
taken so far, or how changes in economic structure are affecting the response of output and
employment.
Let me now say a little about the role the Monetary Policy Committee is playing in addressing
the challenges posed by the global economic downturn.
2.

Unconventional policy measures

The MPC responded to the marked deterioration in the economic outlook with an aggressive
easing in monetary policy. We reduced Bank Rate from 5% to an historic low of just 0.5% in
a matter of months. Moreover, at our policy meeting earlier this month, the Committee
agreed to finance £75 billion of asset purchases by the issuance of central bank reserves, in
order to boost the supply of money and improve the functioning of corporate credit markets.
The purchase (and sale) of assets by central banks is nothing new; central banks have
always implemented monetary policy by changing the size and composition of their balance
sheets. Nor, importantly, has the objective of monetary policy changed, which is to hit the
Government’s 2% target for CPI inflation. What is different, however, is the range of assets
being purchased by the Bank and the scale of those purchases. Given those changes, I want
to explain the rationale for large scale asset purchases in the current economic climate. In
doing so, I will address two key questions. First, how will asset purchases help us meet the
inflation target? And second, how will we monitor the progress of the policy and assess its
effectiveness?
How will asset purchases help us to meet the inflation target?
The objective of the asset purchase programme is to boost nominal spending in order to hit
the inflation target. The tightening in the availability of credit and the collapse in confidence
has led to a sharp slowing in the growth of nominal demand. The four-quarter growth rate of
nominal GDP sank to a record low in the final quarter of last year. The weakness in nominal
spending has been accompanied by a sharp slowdown in the growth of bank lending to firms
and households and in the growth of money holdings of the non-financial sector. At our policy
meeting earlier this month, the Committee judged that without the additional stimulus
provided by the asset purchase programme, the growth of nominal spending would be
insufficient to meet the inflation objective.
The MPC instructed the Bank to use the additional reserves to purchase two types of assets:
gilts and high-quality corporate debt. This twin-track approach allows for asset purchases to
stimulate nominal spending in a variety of different ways. Such a pragmatic strategy seems
entirely sensible given that this in the first time these unconventional tools have been used in
the UK.
I find it helpful to summarise the different mechanisms through which asset purchases may
boost nominal spending into three broad channels.

4

BIS Review 46/2009

First, the purchases of gilts will act to increase their prices and reduce their yields. This
change in the relative attractiveness of holding gilts is likely to cause investors to reallocate
their portfolios into other assets, such as corporate bonds, which in turn will tend to reduce
the yields on those assets. In so doing, the borrowing costs faced by firms and households
should fall. As of today, the Bank has purchased £13bn of gilts from investors.
Second, purchasing assets with central bank reserves will significantly increase the amount
of liquidity in the system. This expansion in the supply of money may in itself encourage
greater levels of lending and borrowing. Bank deposits are likely to increase, providing banks
with a ready source of funding to finance additional lending. Similarly, as the additional
liquidity permeates through the economy, companies may feel less constrained by the need
to hoard liquidity and more able to undertake investment projects.
Third, purchases of high-quality corporate debt should help to improve the functioning of
corporate credit markets. Strains on financial institutions’ balance sheets, combined with
heightened levels of uncertainty and risk aversion, have impaired the liquidity of key
corporate credit markets. Firms’ access to some of these markets has been restricted and
the cost of credit inflated. By purchasing assets in a targeted way, the Bank can aid liquidity
in these markets and so improve the availability of corporate credit. The Bank has been
purchasing commercial paper for over a month now. It made its first purchases of corporate
bonds this week. And we are reviewing the case for intervention in other corporate credit
markets.
Importantly, the objective of the Bank’s operations within corporate credit markets is not to
purchase a specific quantity of assets; rather it is to improve the functioning of those
markets. The scale of purchases required to improve market liquidity may in fact be relatively
small: the very knowledge that the Bank stands ready to purchase assets may be as
beneficial as the actual asset purchases themselves. Moreover, the required scale of
purchases is likely to diminish over time as liquidity improves and private investors return to
the market. It is important not to judge the potential significance of this channel by the scale
of asset purchases.
How can we monitor the effectiveness of the purchases?
It is much too soon to come to a firm judgement about whether this programme of asset
purchases is having its desired effect. In particular, the impact on the growth of broad money
and credit will not begin to be discernible for several months yet. There are, however, some
encouraging signs. Since the MPC’s announcement, yields on gilts have fallen by 40-60bp at
the horizons at which the Bank is making purchases. This has been accompanied by falls in
yields on non-financial corporate bonds of up to around 30bp. And since the Bank started to
operate in the commercial paper market, spreads have tightened and issuance has
increased. These developments have been mirrored in the positive feedback the Bank has
received from issuers of commercial paper.
Over the coming weeks and months, the MPC will be monitoring a wide range of indicators
as we form an initial assessment of the likely effectiveness of the asset purchase programme
in stimulating nominal spending. A critical issue will be the extent to which movements in
asset prices and market spreads are translated into lower borrowing rates faced by
businesses and households. Equally important will be the extent to which the additional
liquidity and lower borrowing rates act to spur the growth of broad money and credit.
I am confident that increasing the supply of money will eventually lead to an increase in
nominal demand. But there is considerable uncertainty about the relative importance of the
different channels through which it may work. As such, I welcome the eclectic, twin-track
approach adopted by the Committee. There is also considerable uncertainty about the
overall size and timing of the impact of the monetary expansion on nominal spending and on
the prospects for inflation. That is why in the minutes of its March meeting, the MPC

BIS Review 46/2009

5

indicated that, just as with its decisions on Bank Rate, we would review the appropriate scale
of the asset purchase programme each and every month.
3.

Conclusion

The extraordinary developments in the global economy since the autumn have been
matched by the magnitude of the policy response. Monetary policy continues to play its part,
with Bank Rate set at a historically low level and the launch of a large-scale asset purchase
programme. Throughout these dramatic developments, the objective guiding the
Committee’s decisions has remained the same: the need to keep inflation on track to meet
the Government’s 2% inflation target. It was that objective that underpinned the decisions to
reduce Bank Rate to unprecedented levels. And it was that objective that drove the MPC to
adopt unconventional policy measures.
The inflation target will also dictate the rate at which the stance of monetary policy is returned
to normal as economic prospects recover. The outlook for inflation relative to the inflation
target provides the natural guide to exiting from this period of exceptional monetary stimulus.
Importantly, this exit strategy is clear, transparent and open to public scrutiny. Openness and
transparency have been the cornerstones of UK monetary policy since the Monetary Policy
Committee was established in 1997. That has never been more important than now.
The inflation target is symmetric. That requires the MPC to set policy in a symmetric way.
The Committee adjusted monetary policy boldly and decisively on the way down in order to
meet the inflation target. And, let me assure you that, when the time comes, we will be
prepared to respond with equal vigour on the way back up.

6

BIS Review 46/2009

Andrew G Haldane: Rethinking the financial network
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at
at the Financial Student Association, Amsterdam, 28 April 2009.
I would like to thank Ian Bond, Sebastiano Daros, Kemal Ercevik, David Gregory, Sujit Kapadia, Iman van
Leyveld, Sarah Parkinson, Filipa Sa, Nick Vause, Lewis Webber, Matthew Willison and Peter Zimmerman for
comments and contributions. I would also like to thank Lord Robert May for conversations on the topic.

*

*

*

On 16 November 2002, the first official case of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
was recorded in Guangdong Province, China. Panic ensued. Uncertainty about its causes
and contagious consequences brought many neighbouring economies across Asia to a
standstill. Hotel occupancy rates in Hong Kong fell from over 80% to less than 15%, while
among Beijing’s 5-star hotels occupancy rates fell below 2%.
Media and modern communications fed this frenzy and transmitted it across borders. In
North America, parents kept their children from school in Toronto, longshoreman refused to
unload a ship in Tacoma due to concerns about its crew and there was a boycott of large
numbers of Chinese restaurants across the United States. Dr David Baltimore, Nobel prize
winner in medicine, commented: “People clearly have reacted to it with a level of fear that is
incommensurate with the size of the problem”.
The macroeconomic impact of the SARS outbreak will never be known with any certainty.
But it is estimated to stand at anything up to $100 billion in 2003 prices. Across Asia, growth
rates were reduced by SARS by between 1 and 4 percentage points. Yet in the final
reckoning, morbidity and mortality rates were, by epidemiological standards, modest. Only
around 8000 people were infected and fewer than 1000 died.
On 15 September 2008, Lehman Brothers filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in a New York
courtroom in the United States. Panic ensued. Uncertainty about its causes and contagious
consequences brought many financial markets and institutions to a standstill. The market for
Credit Default Swaps (CDS) froze, as Lehman was believed to be counterparty to around $5
trillion of CDS contracts.
Media and modern communications fed this frenzy and transmitted it across markets. Banks
hoarded liquidity for fear of lending to infected banks, causing gridlock in term money
markets, spreads on lower-rated companies’ bonds spiked and there was an effective
boycott of the remaining large US investment banks. Professor Paul Krugman, Nobel prize
winner in economics, commented: “Letting Lehman fail basically brought the entire world
capital market down.”
The macroeconomic impact of Lehman Brothers’ failure will never be known with any
certainty. IMF forecasts of global growth for 2009 have been revised down by over 5
percentage points since Lehman’s failure. Yet in the final reckoning, the direct losses from
Lehman’s failure seem likely to be relatively modest. Net payouts on Lehman’s CDS
contracts amounted to only around $5 billion.
These similarities are striking. An external event strikes. Fear grips the system which, in
consequence, seizes. The resulting collateral damage is wide and deep. Yet the triggering
event is, with hindsight, found to have been rather modest. The flap of a butterfly’s wing in
New York or Guangdong generates a hurricane for the world economy. The dynamics
appear chaotic, mathematically and metaphorically.
These similarities are no coincidence. Both events were manifestations of the behaviour
under stress of a complex, adaptive network. Complex because these networks were a cat’scradle of interconnections, financial and non-financial. Adaptive because behaviour in these
networks was driven by interactions between optimising, but confused, agents. Seizures in

BIS Review 53/2009

1

the electricity grid, degradation of eco-systems, the spread of epidemics and the
disintegration of the financial system – each is essentially a different branch of the same
network family tree.
This paper considers the financial system as a complex adaptive system. It applies some of
the lessons from other network disciplines – such as ecology, epidemiology, biology and
engineering – to the financial sphere. Peering through the network lens, it provides a rather
different account of the structural vulnerabilities that built-up in the financial system over the
past decade and suggests ways of improving its robustness in the period ahead.
Part 1 provides the diagnosis. Using network theory and evidence, it explains the emergence
of two characteristics of the financial network over the past decade – complexity and
homogeneity. Together, these resulted in a financial network:
•

Which was at the same time both robust and fragile – a property exhibited by other
complex adaptive networks, such as tropical rainforests;

•

Whose feedback effects under stress (hoarding of liabilities and fire-sales of assets)
added to these fragilities – as has been found to be the case in the spread of certain
diseases;

•

Whose dimensionality and hence complexity amplified materially Knightian
uncertainties in the pricing of assets – causing seizures in certain financial markets;

•

Where financial innovation, in the form of structured products, increased further
network dimensionality, complexity and uncertainty; and

•

Whose diversity was gradually eroded by institutions’ business and risk
management strategies, making the whole system less resistant to disturbance –
mirroring the fortunes of marine eco-systems whose diversity has been steadily
eroded and whose susceptibility to collapse has thereby increased.

This evolution in the topology of the network meant that sharp discontinuities in the financial
system were an accident waiting to happen. The present crisis is the materialisation of that
accident.
Given that diagnosis, Part 2 of the paper provides some tentative policy prescriptions. The
experience of other network disciplines suggests a rather different approach to managing the
financial network than has been the case in the past, if future systemic dislocations are to be
averted. Three areas in particular are discussed:
•

Data and Communications: to allow a better understanding of network dynamics
following a shock and thereby inform public communications. For example, learning
from epidemiological experience in dealing with SARs, or from macroeconomic
experience after the Great Depression, putting in place a system to map the global
financial network and communicate to the public about its dynamics;

•

Regulation: to ensure appropriate control of the damaging network consequences of
the failure of large, interconnected institutions. For example learning from
experience in epidemiology by seeking actively to vaccinate the “super-spreaders”
to avert financial contagion; and

•

Restructuring: to ensure the financial network is structured so as to reduce the
chances of future systemic collapse. For example, learning from experience with
engineering networks through more widespread implementation of central
counterparties and intra-system netting arrangements, which reduce the financial
network’s dimensionality and complexity.

Networks and finance are not complete strangers. There has been growing interest among
network theorists in applying their techniques to financial phenomena over the past few
years. For example, network techniques have already been applied extensively to the

2

BIS Review 53/2009

dynamics of payment systems and inter-bank networks. 1 But the financial crisis of the past
two years provides both a greater body of evidence, and a stronger incentive, to apply the
lessons from other network disciplines to the pressing problems facing financial policymakers
today.
Part 1: Topology of the financial network
In many important respects, the current financial crisis is cut from familiar cloth. Its genesis
was the over-extension of credit, over-inflation of asset prices and over-exuberance of
participants. From the South Sea bubble to the sub-prime crisis, this roll-call of excesses is
familiar. Gerald Corrigan, ex-President of the New York Fed, said ahead of the crisis:
“In recent years the pace of change and innovation in financial markets
and institutions here and around the world has increased enormously as
have the speed, volume and value of financial transactions. The period
has also seen a greatly heightened degree of aggressive competition in
the financial sector. All of this is taking place in the context of a legal and a
regulatory framework which is increasingly outdated and ill-equipped to
meet the challenges of the day. This has led to…concern that the fragility
of the system has increased, in part because the degree of operational,
liquidity and credit interdependency has risen sharply”. 2
Corrigan was speaking in January 1987. The crisis foretold was the October 1987 stock
market crash. Plus ça change.
Yet in some more fundamental respects this time’s crisis feels different – larger probably,
more discontinuous, complex and interconnected certainly. There are already numerous
accounts of why that might be. Here, I argue that these knife-edge dynamics can essentially
be explained by two structural features of the financial network. These have developed over
many years but at particular pace over the past decade. They are complexity on the one
hand, and homogeneity on the other.
In essence, the financial network has over time become progressively more complex and
less diverse. Why? And what have been the consequences?
In the 1987 film Wall Street, the financial sector mantra was “greed is good”. The stock
market crash of the same year put paid to that doctrine, at least temporarily. By the early part
of this century, both the circumstances and the individuals had changed. So too had the
mantra. It had become the rather gentler “diversification is desirable”. Risk-taking became
less Gordon Gekko and more Merton Miller.
Diversification came care of two complementary business strategies. The first was “originate
and distribute”. Risk became a commodity. As such it could be bundled, sliced, diced and
then re-bundled for onward sale. Credit became, in the jargon, structured. Securitisation was
one vehicle for achieving this. Derivatives, such as CDS, were another. As these marketable
instruments passed between participants, the network chain lengthened.
In principle, these instruments delivered a Pareto-improving reallocation of risk. Risk would
flow to those best able to bear it. They had deep pockets which they sought to line with
higher yield. For the system as a whole, this sounded like the land of milk and honey. For a
risk shared was a risk halved – perhaps more than halved, given the magic of diversification.
The network chain, meanwhile, just kept on growing.

1

Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2007); May, Levin and Sugihara (2008); Allen and Gale (2000).

2

Corrigan (1987).

BIS Review 53/2009

3

The second strategy was diversification of business lines. Firms migrated activity to where
returns looked largest. As each new day dawned – leveraged loans yesterday, CDOs today,
proprietary trading tomorrow – the whole sector was drawn to the new source of sunlight.
Through competitive forces, finance engaged in a frantic game of follow-the-leader, played
for real money.
From an individual firm perspective, these strategies indeed looked like sensible attempts to
purge risk through diversification: more eggs were being placed in the basket. Viewed across
the system as a whole, however, it is clear now that these strategies generated the opposite
result: the greater the number of eggs, the greater the fragility of the basket – and the greater
the probability of bad eggs.
Securitisation increased the dimensionality, and thus complexity, of the financial network.
Nodes grew in size and interconnections between them multiplied. The financial cat’s-cradle
became dense and opaque. As a result, the precise source and location of underlying claims
became anyone’s guess. Follow-the-leader became blind-man’s buff. In short, diversification
strategies by individual firms generated heightened uncertainty across the system as a
whole.
Meanwhile, a strategy of changing the way they had looked in the past led to many firms
looking the same as each other in the present. Banks’ balance sheets, like Tolstoy’s happy
families, grew all alike. So too did their risk management strategies. Financial firms looked
alike and responded alike. In short, diversification strategies by individual firms generated a
lack of diversity across the system as a whole.
So what emerged during this century was a financial system exhibiting both greater
complexity and less diversity. Up until 2007, many participants in financial markets would
have viewed that network evolution as the inevitable by-product of technical progress in
finance. Until then, complexity plus homogeneity equalled stability.
But in just about every non-financial discipline – from ecologists to engineers, from
geneticists to geologists – this evolution would have set alarm bells ringing. Based on their
experience, complexity plus homogeneity did not spell stability; it spelt fragility. In
understanding why, it is useful to explore some of the wider lessons from those disciplines,
taking in turn the effects of complexity and diversity on stability.
Complexity and stability
Tropical rainforests are a complex adaptive system. In the immediate post-war period, these
eco-systems were often used as a case-study when demonstrating why complex systems
tended to exhibit greater stability. 3 In Elton’s (1958) words, this was because there are
“always enough enemies and parasites available to turn on any species that starts being
unusually numerous”. Complexity strengthened self-regulatory forces in systems, so
improving robustness. This was the prevailing ecological wisdom up until the early 1970s.
That conventional wisdom has since been turned on its head. From the 1970s onwards,
orthodoxy was altered by a combination of enriched mathematical models and practical
experience. 4 Counter-examples emerged, with some simple eco-systems – savannas and
grasslands – found to exhibit high robustness and some complex eco-systems proving
vulnerable to attack. Perhaps tellingly, large-scale clearance of tropical rainforests
highlighted their inherent fragility. Not for nothing did rainforests become known as a “nonrenewable” resource from the early 1970s.

3

For example, Voute (1946) and Elton (1958).

4

For example, May (1974).

4

BIS Review 53/2009

Finance appears to be following in ecologists’ footsteps, albeit with a generational lag. Until
recently, mathematical models of finance pointed to the stabilising effects of financial network
completeness. 5 Connectivity meant risk dispersion. Real-world experience appeared to
confirm that logic. Between 1997 and 2007, buffeted by oil prices shocks, wars and dotcom
mania, the financial system stood tall; it appeared self-regulating and self-repairing. Echoes
of 1950s ecology were loud and long.
The past 18 months have revealed a system which has shown itself to be neither selfregulating nor self-repairing. Like the rainforests, when faced with a big shock, the financial
system has at times risked becoming non-renewable. Many of the reasons for this have a
parallel in other disciplines. In particular, in making sense of recent financial network
dynamics, four mechanisms appear to have been important: connectivity; feedback;
uncertainty; and innovation.
(a)

Connectivity and stability

Over the past 30 years, a great deal has been established about the links between network
connectivity and robustness. These lessons span a range of disciplines including physics,
biology, engineering and epidemiology. There are perhaps three key robustness results from
this literature which are relevant to the financial system.
Perhaps the key one concerns the “robust-yet-fragile” property of connected networks. 6 The
intuition behind this result is beguilingly simple, but its implications profound. In a nutshell,
interconnected networks exhibit a knife-edge, or tipping point, property. Within a certain
range, connections serve as a shock-absorber. The system acts as a mutual insurance
device with disturbances dispersed and dissipated. Connectivity engenders robustness.
Risk-sharing – diversification – prevails.
But beyond a certain range, the system can flip the wrong side of the knife-edge.
Interconnections serve as shock-amplifiers, not dampeners, as losses cascade. The system
acts not as a mutual insurance device but as a mutual incendiary device. Risk-spreading –
fragility – prevails. The extent of the systemic dislocation is often disproportionate to the size
of the initial shock. Even a modest piece of news might be sufficient to take the system
beyond its tipping point. This same basic logic has latterly been applied to financial systems,
using mathematical models and simulated data. 7
These knife-edge dynamics match closely the behaviour of the financial system in the recent
past. A lengthy period of seeming robustness (the Golden Decade from 1997 to 2007) was
punctuated by an acute period of financial fragility (the period since). The shock causing this
tipping point to be reached – the sub-prime crisis – was by global financial standards rather
modest. The robust-yet-fragile property of networks helps make sense of these non-linear
financial dynamics. Though they looked and felt like chaos, these dynamics were in fact
manifestations of a new network order.
The second key robustness result concerns the “long-tailed distribution” of connected
networks. The degree of a node measures the number of links to other nodes. So the degree
distribution could be thought of as a histogram of the number of links for each node. For a
network whose links are randomly configured, this degree distribution would be symmetric
and bell-shaped; it would have a fat middle and thin tails.

5

For example, Allen and Gale (op.cit).

6

For example, May and Anderson (1991), Albert et al (2004), Kinney et al (2005), Watts (2002).

7

For example, at the Bank of England by Nier et al (2008) and Gai and Kapadia (2008); and by Battiston et al
(2009) and Gallegati et al (2008).

BIS Review 53/2009

5

But many real-world networks do not exhibit these properties, including the internet,
biological food webs and epidemiology networks. 8 Instead these networks have been found
to have a thin middle and long, fat tails. There is a larger than expected number of nodes
with both a smaller and a larger number of links than average. Some financial networks, such
as payment systems, have also been found to exhibit long tails. 9
Long tails have been shown to have important implications for network robustness. In
particular, long-tailed distributions have been shown to be more robust to random
disturbances, but more susceptible to targeted attacks.10 Why? Because a targeted attack on
a hub risks bringing the heart of the system to a standstill, whereas random attacks are most
likely to fall on the periphery.
This result carries important policy implications. Long periods of apparent robustness, where
peripheral nodes are subject to random shocks, should offer little comfort or assurance of
network health. It is only when the hub – a large or connected financial institution – is subject
to stress that network dynamics will be properly unearthed. When large financial institutions
came under stress during this crisis, these adverse system-wide network dynamics revealed
themselves.
The third result is the well-known “small world” property of connected networks. 11 The origin
of this was a chain letter experiment by Stanley Milgram in 1967. This showed that the
average path length (number of links) between any two individuals was around six – hence
“six degrees of separation”. Although networks tend to exhibit local clustering or
neighbourhoods, certain key nodes can introduce short-cuts connecting otherwise detached
local communities.
This small world property has again been found across a range of physical networks,
including the World Wide Web and forest fires. 12 Its implications for network robustness are
subtle. In general, however, it will tend to increase the likelihood of local disturbances having
global effects – so-called “long hops”. That could occur between different institutions or
between different nation states. Either way, a small world is more likely to turn a local
problem into a global one.
So what evidence do we have on these three characteristics in real financial networks?
Charts 1-3 look at the evolution in the international financial network. In particular, they look
at cross-border stocks of external assets and liabilities in 18 countries at three dates: 1985,
1995 and 2005. These data can be used to gauge the scale and evolution of interconnectivity
within the global financial network.
In Charts 1-3, the nodes are scaled in proportion to total external financial stocks, while the
thickness of the links between nodes is proportional to bilateral external financial stocks
relative to GDP. 13 Table 1, meanwhile, provides some summary statistics for the international
financial network, in particular measures of the skew and fat-tailedness in the degree
distribution and its average path length.
Three key points emerge. First, it is clear that the scale and interconnectivity of the
international financial network has increased significantly over the past two decades. Nodes

8

May (2006).

9

Pröpper et al (2008).

10

May and Anderson (1991), Porterie et al (2008).

11

Watts and Strogatz (1998).

12

On the former see Albert et al (2000); on the latter see Porterie et al (2008).

13

Specifically, nodes are scaled by (Total External Assets + Total External Liabilities) for each node, and links
between nodes i and j by (Total External Assetsij + Total External Liabilitiesij )/(GDPi + GDPj). The data are
developed and analysed in Kubulec and Sa (2008).

6

BIS Review 53/2009

have ballooned, increasing roughly 14-fold. And links have become both fatter and more
frequent, increasing roughly 6-fold. The network has become markedly more dense and
complex. And what is true between countries is also likely to have been true between
institutions within countries.
Second, the international financial network exhibits a long-tail. Measures of skew and
kurtosis suggest significant asymmetry in the network’s degree distribution. Global finance
appears to comprise a relatively small number of financial hubs with multiple spokes.
Third, the average path length of the international financial network has also shrunk over the
past twenty years. Between the largest nation states, there are fewer than 1.4 degrees of
separation. Were the network extended beyond the 18 countries in the sample, the evolution
of this “small world” property would be clearer still.
So based on evidence from a sampled international financial network, the past twenty years
have resulted in a financial system with high and rising degrees of interconnection, a longtailed degree distribution and small world properties. That is an unholy trinity. From a stability
perspective, it translates into a robust-yet-fragile system, susceptible to a loss of confidence
in the key financial hubs and with rapid international transmission of disturbances. That is not
the worst description of financial events over the past decade – and in particular over the
past 18 months.
(b)

Feedback and stability

In epidemiology, the impact of a disease depends crucially on such structural parameters as
the mortality rate once infected and the transmission rate across agents. 14 The first is largely
fixed and biological. But the second is likely to be variable and sociological. In other words,
agents’ responses to infection, or indeed the fear of infection, are often crucial in determining
its rate of transmission.
In practice, these behavioural responses typically take one of two forms: “hide” or “flight”. For
example, the response to the SARS epidemic in the 21st century was a “hide” response, with
people self-quarantining by staying at home and with flight, in this case literally, prohibited.
But the response to yellow fever in North America in the 19th century was “flight”, with half
the population of Memphis fleeing in 1878. 15
Either response is rational from an individual perspective. Both responses have the aim of
removing that individual from circulation with other, potentially infectious, agents. But the
implications of these responses for infection rates across the system are potentially very
different. Hide responses tend to contain infection locally, thus protecting the system globally.
This was the SARS experience. Flight, by contrast, tends to propagate infection globally.
This was the yellow fever experience, as incidence of the disease followed the railroad line
out of Memphis. 16
During this financial crisis, faced with fears about infection, similar sets of behavioural
responses by financial institutions have occurred. Only the names are different. The “hiding”
has taken the form of hoarding, typically of liquidity. And the “flight” from infected cities has
taken the form of flight from infected assets, as institutions have sold toxic assets. Unlike in
an epidemiological context, however, both behavioural responses have aggravated stresses
in the financial system. How so?

14

May (2006), Newman (2002).

15

Epstein et al (2008) provide a range of examples.

16

Wheelis (2006) provides an excellent example of the role of human (in this particular case literal) flight in
th
transmitting the Plague to Europe in the 14 Century. Transmission of the Plague was reputedly the result of
Genoese traders fleeing the Crimean city of Caffa after the Mongol army had catapulted infected corpses over
the city walls.

BIS Review 53/2009

7

Banks entered the crisis with a large portfolio of risky assets. As risk materialised, banks
rationally sought to protect themselves from infection from other banks by hoarding liquidity
rather than on-lending it. The result has been enduring stress in money markets. Banks’
mutual interdependence in inter-bank networks meant that individually-rational actions
generated a collectively worse funding position for all.
That, in turn, contributed to the second behavioural response. Unable easily to fund their
asset portfolio, some financial firms instead opted for flight through sales of assets. These
acted like the railroad out of Memphis, placing downward pressure on asset prices and
thereby spreading the infection to other institutions. Others’ immunity to infection was
simultaneously being lowered by widespread marking of assets to market. In escaping the
plague, asset flight served to propagate it.
These behavioural dynamics – panic hoarding of liabilities, distress sales of assets – have
been defining features of this crisis. Placing these responses in a network framework clarifies
the individual rationalities, but collective externalities, that drove these actions. These rational
responses by banks to fear of infection added to the fragility of an already robust-yet-fragile
financial network.
(c)

Uncertainty and stability

A related, but separate, behavioural response to fear of infection is felt in the pricing of
financial instruments. Networks generate chains of claims. At times of stress, these chains
can amplify uncertainties about true counterparty exposures. Who is really at the end of the
chain – Warren Buffett or Bernard Madoff? Through their impact on counterparty uncertainty,
networks have important consequences for dynamics and pricing in financial markets.
To illustrate, consider the case of pricing in the CDS market – an inherently complex, high
dimension market. In particular, consider Bank A seeking insurance from Bank B against the
failure of Entity C. Bank A faces counterparty risk on Bank B. If that were the end of the
story, network uncertainty would not much matter. Bank A could monitor Bank B’s
creditworthiness, if necessary directly, and price the insurance accordingly.
But what if Bank B itself has n counterparties? And what if each of these n counterparties
itself has n counterparties? Knowing your ultimate counterparty’s risk then becomes like
solving a high-dimension Sudoku puzzle. Links in the chain, like cells in the puzzle, are
unknown – and determining your true risk position is thereby problematic.
For Bank A, not knowing the links in the chain means that judging the default prospects of
Bank B becomes a lottery. Indeed, in some ways it is worse than a lottery, whose odds are at
least known. In this example, Bank A faces uncertainty in the Knightian sense, as distinct
from risk, about the true network structure. Counterparty risk is not just unknown; it is almost
unknowable. And the higher the dimensionality of the network, the greater that uncertainty.
It is possible to formalise this intuition with some simple numerical examples. 17
Consider two states of the world, pre-crisis and crisis. And consider the impact of network
complexity on CDS pricing. Once we introduce Knightian uncertainty, asset prices are no
longer determinate; they are defined by a range rather than a point. So the range of
equilibrium CDS spreads can be taken as a metric of the uncertainty, and hence distortion,
arising from different network structures.
Chart 4 plots a pre-crisis world where it is assumed that counterparty default probabilities,
and the uncertainty around them, are low. Subject to those assumptions, it illustrates how the
range of CDS spreads is affected by Bank B’s number of counterparties. Larger numbers of

17

The following is based on work in progress at the Bank on asset pricing under network Knightian uncertainty,
by Sebastiano Daros and Kemal Ercevik.

8

BIS Review 53/2009

counterparties are marginally beneficial. There is a “law of large numbers” benefit. Broadlyspeaking, however, network dimensionality has no material bearing on CDS pricing.
Chart 5 simulates a crisis world in which the default probability of Bank B has risen and so
too the uncertainty around that probability. The difference is striking. Pricing uncertainty now
increases with the dimensionality of the web. Extra counterparties add to, rather than
subtract from, pricing distortions. There is a “law of large numbers” cost. That uncertainty
cost, or Knightian distortion, is roughly proportional the dimension of the network.
It is difficult not to draw comparisons with Lehman’s experience. Lehman had large CDS
counterparty exposures relative to its balance sheet and hundreds of counterparties. AIG
was similarly situated. It is little wonder participants took fright as both institutions came
under stress, fearful not so much of direct counterparty risk, but of indirect counterparty risks
emanating from elsewhere in the network. The network chain was so complex that spotting
the weakest link became impossible. This added yet a further layer of fragility to the financial
system.
(d)

Innovation and stability

A fourth dimension to complexity in network chains derives from the effects of financial
innovation. Over the past decade, this often took a particular form – structured credit – with
risk decomposed and then reconstituted like the meat in an increasingly exotic sausage. The
result was a complex interlocking set of claims. With each restructuring of ingredients, the
web branched and the dimensionality of the network multiplied.
Chart 6 shows some of the interlocking networks of structured products that emerged. I will
not attempt to describe this chart; it would take too long and, even if I had the time, I doubt I
would have the ability. These were the self-same constraints – time, complexity – which
faced investors in these products. Due diligence was the casualty. End-investors in these
instruments were no more likely to know the name of the companies in their portfolios than
the name of the cow or pig in their exotic hot dog.
To illustrate, consider an investor conducting due diligence on a set of financial claims:
RMBS, ABS CDOs and CDO2. How many pages of documentation would a diligent investor
need to read to understand these products? Table 2 provides the answer. For simpler
products, this is just about feasible – for example, around 200 pages, on average, for an
RMBS investor. But an investor in a CDO2 would need to read in excess of 1 billion pages to
understand fully the ingredients.
With a PhD in mathematics under one arm and a Diploma in speed-reading under the other,
this task would have tried the patience of even the most diligent investor. With no time to
read the small-print, the instruments were instead devoured whole. Food poisoning and a
lengthy loss of appetite have been the predictable consequences. Though it had aimed to
dampen institutional risk, innovation in financial instruments served to amplify further network
fragility.
Diversity and stability
A final dimension to network robustness concerns the effects of diversity. The oceans
provide a rich and lengthy test-bed of the links between diversity and robustness. Over the
past millennium, studies of coastal eco-systems reveal some dramatic patterns. 18 For around
800 years, between the years 1000-1800AD, fish stocks and species numbers were
seemingly stable and robust. Since then, almost 40% of fish species across the world’s major

18

The results here are based on Worm et al (2006).

BIS Review 53/2009

9

coastal eco-systems have “collapsed”, defined here as a fall in population of greater than
90%. That is systemic by any metric.
There appear to be many environmental reasons for this collapse, some natural, others manmade. But the distribution of this collapse across eco-systems is revealing. For species-rich –
that is, diverse – eco-systems the rate of collapse has been as low as 10%; for species-poor
eco-systems, as high as 60%. Diverse coastal eco-systems have proved to be markedly
more robust, measured over century spans.
Results for large marine eco-systems suggest a similar picture. Over the period 1950-2003,
the incidence of collapsed fisheries declines exponentially with species-diversity. 19 Diversity
also appears to increase the resilience of fisheries – that is, their capacity to recover – in the
event of collapse. These results reappear throughout marine eco-systems, “in coral reefs in
Jamaica and on rocky shores in Panama”. 20
And they do not appear to be unique to marine eco-systems. For example, similar effects of
diversity have been found in studies of the resilience of crops to pathogen outbreaks; in the
robustness of savannas and grassland to drought; and in morbidity and mortality rates
among humans facing disease and infection. 21 Diversity of the gene pool, it seems, improves
durability.
The financial system has mirrored the fortunes of the fisheries, for many of the same
reasons. Since the start of 2007, 23 of the largest European and US banks have seen their
market capitalisation fall by 90% or more – the fisheries equivalent of collapse. But what took
marine eco-systems two hundred years to achieve has been delivered by financial engineers
in two. In explaining the collapse in fish and finance, lack of diversity seems to be a common
denominator.
Within the financial sector, diversity appears to have been reduced for two separate, but
related, reasons: the pursuit of return; and the management of risk. The pursuit of yield
resulted in a return on equity race among all types of financial firm. As they collectively
migrated to high-yield activities, business strategies came to be replicated across the
financial sector. Imitation became the sincerest form of flattery.
So savings cooperatives transformed themselves into private commercial banks. Commercial
banks ventured into investment banking. Investment banks developed in-house hedge funds
through large proprietary trading desks. Funds of hedge funds competed with traditional
investment funds. And investment funds – pension, money market mutual, insurance –
imported the risk the others were shedding.
Cumulative returns earned by, on the face of it, very different financial models illustrate this
story (Chart 7). Looking across global banks, large complex financial institutions (LCFIs),
insurance companies and hedge funds, cumulative returns have exhibited a remarkably
similar pattern, both in the run-up to crisis and in the subsequent run-down. Rolling averages
of pairwise correlations across sectors averaged in excess of 0.9 throughout the period
2004-2007. At the height of the credit boom, financial imitation appears to have turned into
near-cloning. Flattery gave way to fat-cattery.
What was true across financial sectors was also true within them. For example, hedge fund
strategies rejoice in such oblique names as “convertible arbitrage” and “dedicated short
bias”. The average pairwise correlation between these different funds’ strategies was roughly
zero at the turn of the century. By 2008, it had risen to around 0.35. Far from daring to be
different, hedge funds seem increasingly to have hunted as a pack.

19

Worm et al (op.cit.).

20

Levin and Lubchenco (2008).

21

For example, Tilman (1999) and Clay (2004).

10

BIS Review 53/2009

Management of the risks resulting from these strategies amplified this homogeneity. Basel II
provided a prescriptive rule-book ensuring a level playing field. Ratings were hard-wired into
regulation. Risk models blossomed, with Value-at-Risk (VaR) and stress-testing providing
seductively precise outputs. Like blossom, these models looked and acted alike – and may
yet prove similarly ephemeral. The level playing field resulted in everyone playing the same
game at the same time, often with the same ball.
Through these channels, financial sector balance sheets became homogenised. Finance
became a monoculture. In consequence, the financial system became, like plants, animals
and oceans before it, less disease-resistant. When environmental factors changed for the
worse, the homogeneity of the financial eco-system increased materially its probability of
collapse.
So where does this leave us? With a financial system exhibiting, for individually quite rational
reasons, increasing complexity and homogeneity. A network which, in consequence, was
robust-yet-fragile. A network predisposed to tipping points and discontinuities, even for small
shocks. A network which, like Tolstoy’s unhappy families, could be unhappy in quite different
ways. A network mostly self-repairing, but occasionally self-destructing. A network which, like
the little girl with the curl, when the going was good was very, very good – but when it turned
bad was horrid.
Part 2: Improving network stability
This is a gloomy prognosis: a financial system teetering between triumph and disaster.
Unlike Kipling, policymakers in practice are unlikely to treat those two imposters just the
same. Recent events have rather illustrated that. Public interventions in the financial system
during this crisis – through liquidity injections, capital injections or public sector guarantees –
already total in excess of £5 trillion. 22
So what could be done to protect the financial network from future such dynamics? And are
there lessons from other network disciplines which might help inform these efforts? Let me
highlight three areas where improvements in the robustness of the financial network seem
feasible: mapping; regulating; and restructuring.
(a)

Mapping the network

The SARS episode may be remembered by historians as an overblown economic reaction to
a small health risk – that was Nobel Laureate Dr David Baltimore’s prognosis. But there is an
alternative reading of the runes, one which offers some lessons, and not a little hope, for
financial policymakers.
In 2000, the World Health Organisation (WHO) established the Global Outbreak Alert and
Response Network (GOARN). This brings together over 120 international institutions and
networks to share resources to better identify and manage outbreaks. In the case of SARS,
the speed and scale of response was striking.
On 12 March 2003, less than two weeks after the Hong Kong outbreak, the WHO issued a
global health alert. On 15 March, a “general travel advisory” was issued. By 17 March, a
network of scientists from 11 laboratories in 9 countries was established to devise diagnostic
tests, analyse samples and share results in real time. This allowed national agencies to
promulgate information quickly and widely, with governments in Thailand, Malaysia, China,

22

For example, Bank of England Financial Stability Report, October 2008.

BIS Review 53/2009

11

Singapore and Canada each imposing some combination of travel bans, quarantining and
public health notices. 23
These measures appear to have contributed both to the rapid subsidence of SARS-related
fears and uncertainties among the general public and to containing the spread of the
disease. Since April 2004, there have been no reported cases of SARS. The global
information infrastructure of GOARN is widely acknowledged as having helped nip the SARS
crisis in the bud.
There are important lessons here for the financial system. At present, risk measurement in
financial systems is atomistic. Risks are evaluated node by node. In a network, this approach
gives little sense of risks to the nodes, much less to the overall system. It risks leaving
policymakers navigating in dense fog when assessing the dynamics of the financial system
following failure. The market repercussions of Lehman’s failure were in part the result of such
restricted visibility.
What more might be done to prevent a repeat? Part of the answer lies in improved data, part
in improved analysis of that data, and part in improved communication of the results. On
data, in some real-world physical networks, data is collected on virtually all nodes and links.
For example, in modelling the US electricity grid, data are collected on all major power
stations (nodes) and power lines (links). 24 As these total 14,000 and 20,000 respectively, this
is a large-dimension network.
Data from physical networks such as the power grid are relatively easy to collect. For many
other large-dimension networks, sampling techniques are typically required. These typically
take one of three forms: node sampling; link sampling; and “snowball” sampling. 25 There are
lessons for the financial system from all three.
To date, sampling of nodes has been the dominant means of assessing risk within the
financial system, typically for a sub-set of the nodes such as banks. Where non-bank
financial intermediaries are an important part of the network, sampling of nodes has shown
itself deficient. For example, little was known about the activities of off balance sheet vehicles
– SIVs and conduits – ahead of crisis. More fundamentally, this approach provides little
information on the links between nodes. These are central to understanding network
dynamics. Imagine assessing the robustness of the electricity grid with data on power
stations but not on the power lines connecting them.
Sampling of links has historically been little deployed when analysing the financial system.
Some data exist on the degree of linkage between financial firms – for example, from
regulatory returns on large exposures. This has been used to construct rough
approximations of inter-bank networks. 26 But these data are typically partial and lack
timeliness. They are weak foundations for understanding the financial network.
That takes us to snowballing – that is, constructing a picture of the network by working
outwards from the links to one of the nodes. As a way of understanding the financial web,
there are attractions to this approach. It is agnostic about which are the key nodes and
important links. Network boundaries are uncovered by following the money, rather than by
using institutional labels or national or regulatory boundaries.
Applied in practice, this approach might have helped identify some of the key nodal sources
of risk ahead of financial crisis. In early 2007, it is doubtful whether many of the world’s

23

For example, Smith (2006) and McKercher and Chon (2004).

24

For example, Kinney et al (2005).

25

Lee, Kim and Jeong (2006).

26

Propper et al (2008).

12

BIS Review 53/2009

largest financial institutions were more than two or three degrees of separation from AIG.
And in 1998, it is unlikely that many of the world’s largest banks were more than one or two
degrees of separation from LTCM. Rolling the snowball might have identified these financial
black holes before they swallowed too many planets.
There have been a number of recent policy proposals in this general area. For example, the
de Larosiere Report (2009) calls for a European and, ultimately, global initiative to create an
international register of claims between financial institutions. A similar initiative following the
LDC debt crisis resulted in the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) developing
international banking statistics. These are now an essential source of international financial
network data. There is a need for similar ambition now in fashioning international flow of
funds and balance sheet data.
Even with these data, policymakers and practitioners need to invest in new means of
analysis. Node-by-node diagnostics, such as VaR, have shown themselves during this crisis
to offer a poor guide to institutional robustness. Fortunately, network theorists have identified
some of the key summary statistics determining system robustness. 27 This includes degree
distributions and average path lengths. In time, network diagnostics such as these may
displace atomised metrics such as VaR in the armoury of financial policymakers.
To these static diagnostics could be added dynamic summary statistics of network resilience,
such as simulated responses to nodal failure or stress. Stress-testing to date has focussed
on institutional, idiosyncratic risk. It needs instead to focus on system-wide, systematic risk. 28
Advances in computing power mean that technology is no longer a constraint. In studies of
the electricity grid, simulations of hundreds of thousands of observations are common.
Finance can piggy-back on these efforts.
After data and analysis comes, crucially, communication. Network information is a classic
public good. Not only is it in no-one’s individual interest to collect it; nor is it remotely within
anyone’s compass. Aggregate data are a job for the authorities. And having been collected,
these results need then to be disseminated. This is important both ex-ante as a means of
better pricing and managing risk, and ex-post as a means of containing that risk.
In a world of 24/7 media, public communications during crisis become crucial. That was the
lesson from SARS – and may yet be the enduring lesson from Lehman. From midSeptember to mid-October 2008, the financial crisis did not just dominate the news; it was
the news. Only a hermit could have failed to have their perceptions shaped by this tale of
woe. As woe became the popular narrative, depressed expectations may have become selffulfilling.
In their recent book, Animal Spirits, George Akerlof and Robert Shiller emphasise the role of
popular psychology – “stories” – in shaping people’s perceptions and actions. Depression is
a psychological state as well as an economic one. Perhaps the best explanation we have
about events following the Lehman crisis is that these two states merged. Adroit
communications by the authorities, like counselling, might help head-off future bouts of
clinical depression in the financial system.
This is undoubtedly an ambitious agenda. But experience after the Great Depression
suggests grounds for optimism. That crisis brought about a revolution in thinking about
macroeconomic theory and macroeconomic policy. In many respects, it marked the birth of
modern macroeconomic models – in the form of IS/LM analysis – and modern
macroeconomic policy – in the form of activist monetary and fiscal policy.

27

Newman (2002).

28

Haldane (2009).

BIS Review 53/2009

13

Though less heralded, it also resulted in a revolution in macroeconomic data. Despite
attempts in the 1920s and 1930s, it was from the 1940s onwards that national accounts data
emerged for the main developed economies. This was largely a response to the evolution in
macroeconomic thinking and policy-making following the Great Depression. Crisis
experience led theory which in turn led data. That is the evolutionary path finance now needs
to be on.
(b)

Regulating the network

The first diagnosed case of Human Immuno-Deficiency Virus (HIV) in the United States
came in June 1981. The first diagnosed case of HIV in Australia came in November 1982. In
the early 1980s, rates of HIV and AIDS incidence in the US and Australia were roughly
similar on a per capita basis. But from the mid-1980s onwards, things changed. By 1994,
rates of incidence in the US were six times those in Australia. By 2003, the per capita
prevalence of HIV in the US was ten times that in Australia. 29 What explains these
differences?
The short answer appears to be government policy. In the US, the policy stance since the
early 1980s has been largely theological. The preventative response has taken the form of
moralising about sexual abstinence and monogamy. Since the mid-1990s, the US
government has invested in the less contentious areas of HIV/AIDS treatment. But as
recently as 2007, the US administration remained opposed to the provision of condoms or
needle and syringe programmes to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Australian policy since the early 1980s has, by contrast, been grounded in biology rather
than theology. It has been systematic, with policy evidence-based and preventative.
Education and prophylactic measures have been widely available. But there have been
targeted initiatives for high-risk groups – for example, sex workers and drug users – through
subsidised needle and syringe exchanges and free condoms. The results of this programme
are clear in the statistics.
There are perhaps two clear lessons from this experience. First, the importance of targeting
high-risk, high-infection individuals – the “super-spreaders”. This principle has an impeccable
epidemiological pedigree. 30 For randomly distributed networks, targeted treatment has no
value. But for networks exhibiting long tails – which is most of them, certainly including
finance – targeted vaccination programmes offer a much more effective means of curtailing
epidemics.
Not for nothing is epidemiology the origin of the 80/20 principle. 31 For a number of diseases,
including SARS and measles, the distribution of infection rates suggest 20% of the
population is responsible for 80% of the spread. Similar patterns have been found in the
transmission of HIV/AIDS, foot and mouth and computer viruses on the internet. In each of
these cases, the right response has been shown to be targeted vaccination of the superspreaders.
The second lesson concerns the importance of a system-wide approach to the management
of network problems. The Australian HIV/AIDS programme was system-wide, tackling both
the causes and consequences of the disease and its spread. Fisheries management
provides a second revealing case study. Concerns about the collapse of fisheries came to a
head during the 1970s and 1980s, leading to the imposition of fishing quotas for various
species. The effect of quotas was, at best, mixed.

29

Bowtell (2005, 2007).

30

May and Anderson (1991).

31

May and Anderson (op.cit.), May (2005).

14

BIS Review 53/2009

Recently, there has been a growing recognition of what went wrong. In setting quotas, no
account was taken of interactions between species and the surrounding eco-system. During
this century, fisheries management has pursued a different strategy – Ecosystem-Based
Fishery Management (EBFM). 32 EBFM takes as its starting point the management of the
eco-system. It develops system-level standards and single-species targets are calibrated to
ecosystem-wide objectives. The EBFM approach is already being implemented in Alaska,
California and the Antarctic.
Existing regulatory rules for financial institutions have echoes of fisheries management in the
1970s. Risk quotas are calibrated and applied node by node, species by species. This
approach takes no account of individual nodes’ system-wide importance – for example,
arising from their connectivity to other nodes in the network or their scale of operations.
Charts 8 and 9 illustrate the problem. They plot the relationship between global banks’ capital
ratios and their size, where size is used here as a rough proxy for connectivity and scale.
Chart 8 shows there is essentially no relationship between banks’ systemic importance and
their Basel capital ratios. There has been no targeted vaccination of the super-spreaders of
financial contagion. Chart 9 uses leverage ratios rather than risk-weighted Basel capital
ratios. It suggests that, if anything, the super-spreaders may historically have had lower
capital buffers.
One potential explanation of these findings is that large banks have benefited from the
diversification benefits – those words again – of Basel II. Another is that financial markets
have allowed these banks lower capital buffers because of the implicit promise of
government support. Chart 10 offers support for the latter hypothesis. It suggests a positive
relationship between bank size and pre-crisis expectations of official sector support. 33 Size
matters. Historically, the safety net was perceived to be fur-lined for those above a certain
size.
This evidence is discouraging from a systemic risk perspective. It suggests incentives to
generate and propagate risks may have been strongest among those posing greatest
systemic threat. Basel vaccinated the naturally immune at the expense of the contagious: the
celebate were inoculated, the promiscuous intoxicated. Latterly, this defect has begun to be
addressed. For example, the US and Swiss authorities have announced plans to introduce
tighter regulatory requirements for systemic institutions.
There is further to go internationally. Work is needed to give systemic regulation practical
effect. A number of calibration devices have been proposed. 34 With richer data on network
topology, calibrated simulation models could help gauge financial institutions’ marginal
contribution to systemic risk. This is standard practice in management of the electricity grid
and eco-systems. Finance needs to catch up.
(c)

Restructuring the network

In Herbert Simon’s The Architecture of Complexity, he tells the parable of two watchmakers,
Hora and Tempus. 35 Both produce watches composed of 1000 parts. Both watches are, in
this sense, equally complex. They are also of equal quality and sell at the same price. But
Hora’s business prospers, while Tempus’s founders. Why?

32

For example, Pikitch et al (2004).

33

Proxied by Fitch ratings agency’s support ratings for institutions.

34

Including measures of banks’ Conditional VaR or CoVaR (NYU Stern School of Business (2009), and
Brunnermeier et al (2009)). These are statistical measures of an institution’s VaR conditional on other
institutions in the network simultaneously facing stress.

35

Simon (1962).

BIS Review 53/2009

15

The answer lies in the structure of complex systems. Hora’s watches are designed as ten
sub-assemblies each comprising ten elements, which are combined into ten larger subassemblies, ten of which then constitute a whole watch. Tempus, by contrast, assembles his
watches part by part. The result is that, whenever Tempus is interrupted – in Simon’s parable
by a telephone call ordering more watches – his work is lost and he must start again. Hora
suffers the same fate much less frequently, due to the sub-assembly structure of his
watches.
The differences in the robustness of these equally complex structures are dramatic. If the
probability of interruption is 0.01, Hora will complete 9 watches for every 10 attempts. By
contrast, Tempus completes 44 watches for every million attempts. The probability of
horological collapse is lowered from 0.999956 to 0.1.
The secret of the structure of Hora’s complex watches is that they are “hierarchical”, with
separate and separable sub-structures. Simon discusses how a number of other networks,
both social and physical, exhibit this hierarchical structure. This is no evolutionary accident.
For many networks, hierarchy emerges naturally. It is the product of a process of Darwinian
selection in which it is only the hierarchical structures that survive to maturity. Hora’s
business thrives, Tempus’s dies.
In other networks, hierarchy is the result not of natural evolution but human intervention. For
example, the optimal distribution of trees has been shown to comprise contiguous patches
separated by firebreaks. 36 The firebreaks created by man generate hierarchy in this system.
The same man-made firebreaks are present in epidemiological networks, such as the
imposition of travel bans following the SARS outbreak in Asia or the prohibition of animal
movement during the foot and mouth epidemic in the UK. 37
All of this has relevance to the future structure and design of the financial network. What is
second nature to the watch-maker needs to become second nature to the watchdog. Four
topical examples can be used to illustrate the importance of these structural issues for
financial network design.
First, the past decade has seen an explosion in the dimensionality, and thus complexity, of
the financial web. Among others things, that has exacerbated the system’s robust-yet-fragile
characteristics and uncertainty about counterparty pricing within the network. Both have been
much in evidence recently. Yet there are structural means of addressing these combined
problems at a stroke.
The stroke is infrastructure. Central counterparties (CCPs) are intended to deal with precisely
these problems. They interpose themselves between every trade. In this way, a highdimension web is instantly compressed to a sequence of bilateral relationships with the
central counterparty – a simple hub-and-spokes. The lengthy network chain is condensed to
a single link. Provided that link is secure – the hub’s resilience is beyond question –
counterparty uncertainty is effectively eliminated.
Table 3 simulates the benefits of introducing a CCP in reducing counterparty uncertainty. As
in the earlier example, Knightian uncertainty is measured by the size of the range of CDS
spreads. In all cases, moving to a central counterparty (n = 1) results in a material reduction
in uncertainty around spreads. These benefits are predicated on the CCP “super-spreader”
itself being impregnable to attack.
There have been various initiatives over the recent past to introduce central counterparties
for the clearing of certain financial instruments, including CDS products over the past 18

36

Carlson and Doyle (1999).

37

Kelling et al (2003).

16

BIS Review 53/2009

months. 38 This is welcome. But the debate needs not to end there. A much broad range of
over-the-counter financial instruments, both cash and derivatives, could potentially benefit
from the introduction of a central counterparty.
Central counterparties are of course not new. Clearing houses date from the early 19th
century. But, latterly, the question often most asked of central counterparties has been
“Why”? Experience during the crisis means we now know why. From a network resilience
perspective, it is important that in future the central counterparty question becomes not
“Why?” but “Why not”?
Second, financial innovation has created strings of gross claims between financial entities
which far exceed their capital bases. Lehman had gross CDS exposures around eight times
its balance sheet. These gross intra-system claims have grown rapidly over the past decade,
fuelled by off balance sheet activity. CDS growth has outpaced Moore’s Law – the more than
doubling of microchip capacity every two or so years. In the CDS market, what were 1000piece watches in 2000 would by 2007 have become more than 64,000 piece.
Intra-system claims on this scale increase network fragility. When one node collapses, the
ripple across the system risks developing into a tsunami – as Lehman’s experience attests.
Herbert Simon recognised just this problem. Hierarchical networks are, in his words,
decomposable with intra-system interactions constrained. The financial system has recently
evolved in the opposite direction, with intra-system interactions growing and decomposability
of the system thereby reduced.
Policy initiatives may be able to help. For example, infrastructure could be developed to “net
off” gross claims within the financial system. Attempts have already been made to do this in
the CDS market, by tearing-up redundant claims among participants. This has reduced
outstanding CDS claims by as much as 30%. The same netting principle could potentially be
applied to a wider range of contracts and counterparties, to improve the decomposability and
hence robustness of the system. 39
Third, financial innovation in the form of structured credit also had the consequence of
creating a network structure which was non-hierarchical. Financial engineers created
products in which elements of a loan portfolio were reassigned to a higher-order subassembly. In this way, an automatic dependence was created among almost every substructure. By contract design, the overall financial system became impossible to decompose
into separable sub-structures.
Such a structure is in fact worse even than Tempus’s complex production line. Structured
credit was equivalent to taking one part randomly from each of 1000 watches and
reassembling the pieces. No watchmaker in their right mind would expect the resulting
timepiece to keep time for too long. Such was the CDO story.
However sensible structuring of credit may have seemed for individual firms, it is difficult to
conceive of a network which could have been less structurally robust. Darwinian evolution is
currently in the process of naturally deselecting CDOs. But there is a strong public policy
case for the authorities intervening more aggressively when next financial innovation spawns
species with undesirable physiological features.
Finally, the business strategies of financial firms have over the past decade created a
network structure which is much less easily decomposable. Under the old financial order,
mutuals were a sub-structure, as were commercial banks, investment banks and investment
funds. In some cases that was by choice. In other cases it was the result of regulatory

38

President’s Working Group (2008).

39

For example, as proposed in King (2008).

BIS Review 53/2009

17

design: for the larger part of the past century, the Glass-Steagall Act in the US prohibited
inter-breeding between commercial and investment banking.
Deregulation swept away banking segregation and, with it, decomposability of the financial
network. The upshot was a predictable lack of network robustness. That is one reason why
Glass-Steagall is now back on the international policy agenda. It may be the wrong or too
narrow an answer. But it asks the right question: can network structure be altered to improve
network robustness? Answering that question is a mighty task for the current generation of
policymakers. Using network resilience as a metric for success would help ensure it was a
productive one.
Conclusion
Through history, there are many examples of human flight on an enormous scale to avoid the
effects of pestilence and plague. From yellow fever and cholera in the 19th century to polio
and influenza in the 20th. In these cases, human flight fed contagion and contagion fed
human catastrophe. The 21st century offered a different model. During the SARS epidemic,
human flight was prohibited and contagion contained.
In the present financial crisis the flight is of capital, not humans. Yet the scale and contagious
consequences may be no less damaging. This financial epidemic may endure in the
memories long after SARS has been forgotten. But in halting the spread of future financial
epidemics, it is important that the lessons from SARS and from other non-financial networks
are not forgotten.
References
Akerlorf, G, and Shiller, R (2009), “Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the
Economy, and Why It Matters for Global Capitalism”, Princeton University Press.
Albert, R, Albert, I and Nakarado, G.L (2004), “Structural vulnerability of the North
American power grid”, arXiv:condmat/040107v1.
Albert, R, Jeong H and Barabasi, A-L (2000), “Attack and error tolerance of complex
network”, Nature, Vol. 406: 379-382.
Allen, F and Gale, D (2000), “Financial Contagion”, Journal of Political Economy 108(1) 133.
Battiston, S, Gatti, D. D, Gallegati, M, Greenwald, B.C.N. and Stiglitz, J.E. (2009),
“Liasons Dangereuses: Increasing Connectivity, Risk Sharing, and Systemic Risk”. Working
Paper.
Bowtell, W (2005), “Australia’s response to HIV/AIDS 1982-2005”, Lowy Institute for
International Policy.
Bowtell, W (2007), “HIV/AIDS: The looming Asia Pacific Pandemic”, Lowy Institute for
International Policy.
Brunnermeier, M, Crockett, A, Goodhart, C, Persaud, A.D and Shin, H. (2009), “The
fundamental principles of financial regulation”, Geneva Reports on the World Economy 11.
Carlson, J.M and Doyle, J (1999), “Highly optimized tolerance: A mechanism for power
laws in designed systems”, Phys. Rev. E 60: 1412-1427.
Clay, J (2004), “World Agriculture and the Environment: A commodity-by-commodity guide to
impacts and practices”, Washington (DC): Island Press.
Corrigan, E.G (1987), “Financial Market Structure: A Longer View”, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.

18

BIS Review 53/2009

de Larosière, J (2009), “Report”, The high-level group on financial supervision in the EU,
available at ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/docs/de_larosiere_report_en.pdf.
Elton, C.S (1958), “The Ecology of Invasions by Animals and Plants”, Methuen.
Epstein, J.M, Parker, J, Cummings, D, and Hammond, R (2008), “Coupled contagion
dynamics of fear and disease: Mathematical and computational explorations”, PLoS ONE,
Vol. 3, Issue 12: 1-11.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2007), “New Directions for Understanding Systemic
Risk”, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, Vol. 13, No. 2.
Gai, P and Kapadia, S (2008), “Contagion in Financial Networks”, mimeo, Bank of England.
Gallegati, M, Greenwald, B, Richiardi, M and Stiglitz, J (2008), “The Asymmetric Effect of
Diffusion Processes: Risk Sharing and Contagion”, Global Economy Journal, Vol 8, Issue 3.
Galvani, A.P and May, R.M (2005), “Dimensions of superspreading”, Nature, Vol. 438: 293296.
Haldane, A (2009), “Why Banks Failed the Stress Test”,
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech374.pdf.

available

at

Kelling, M.J, Woolhouse, M.E.J, May, R.M and Grenfell, B.T (2003), “Modelling
vaccination strategies against food-and-mouth disease”, Nature, Vol. 421: 136-142.
King, M (2008), Speech to the CBI dinner, Nottingham, Tuesday 20 January 2009, available
at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/
speech372.pdf.
Kinney, R, Crucitti, P, Albert, R and Latora, V (2005), “Modeling Cascading Failures in the
North American Power Grid”, The European Physics Journal, B 46 (2005) 101.
Kubelec, C and Sa, F (2009), “The Geographical Composition of National External Balance
Sheets: 1980-2005”, Bank of England Working Paper (forthcoming).
Lee, S.H, Kim, P-J and Jeong, H (2006), “Statistical properties of sampled networks”,
Physical Review, Vol.73.
Levin, S and Lubchenco, J (2008), “Resilience, Robustness, and Marine Ecosystem-based
Management”, Bioscience Vol. 58: 27-32.
Lloyd-Smith J.O, Schreiber S.J, Kopp, P.E and Getz, W.M (2005), “Superspreading and
the impact of individual variation on disease emergence”. Nature 438, 355-9.
May, R.M (1974), “Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems”, Princeton University
Press.
May, R.M (2006), “Network structure and the biology of populations”, Trends in Ecology and
Evolution Vol. 27, No. 7.
May, R.B and Anderson, R.M (1991), “Infectious Diseases of Humans”, Oxford University
Press.
May, R, Levin, S.A and Sugihara, G (2008), “Complex systems: Ecology for bankers”,
Nature Vol. 451: 893-895.
McKercher, B and Chon, K (2004), “The over-reaction to SARS and the collapse of Asian
tourism”, Annals of Tourism Research 31(3): 716-719.
Milgram, S (1967), “Small-world problem”, Psychology Today 1(1): 61-67.
Newman, M (2003), “The structure and function of complex systems”, arXiv:condmat/0303516v1.
Newman, M (2008), “The physics of networks”, Physics Today: 33-38.

BIS Review 53/2009

19

Nier, E, Yang, J, Yorulmazer, T and Alentorn, A (2008), “Network Models and Financial
Stability”, Bank of England Working Paper No.346.
NYU Stern School of Business (2008), Repairing the US Financial Architecture: An
Independent View.
Pikitch, E.K, Santora, C , Babcock, E.A, Bakun, A, Bonfil, R, Conover, D.O, Dayton, P,
Doukakis, P, Fluharty, D, Heneman, B, Houde, E.D, Link, J, Livingston, P.A, Mangel, M
McAllister, M.K, Pope, J and Sainsbury, K.J (2004), “Ecosystem-Based Fishery
Management”, Science Magazine, Vol. 305: 346-347.
Porterie, B, Kaiss, A, Clerc, J-P and Zekri, L and Zekri, N (2008), “Universal scaling of
forest fire propagation”, eprint arXiv:0805.3365.
President’s Working Group (2008), Initiatives to strengthen OTC derivatives oversight and
infrastructure, available at http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/hp1272.htm.
Pröpper, M, van Lelyveld, I and Heijmans, R (2008), “Towards a network description of
interbank payment flows”, DNB Working Paper No. 177.
Simon, H (1962), “The architecture of complexity”, Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society, Vol. 106, No. 6: 467-482.
Smith, R.D (2006), “Responding to global infectious disease outbreaks: Lessons from SARS
on the role of risk perception, communication and management”, Journal of Social Science
and Medicine, 63, 3113-3123.
Tilman, D (1999), “The ecological consequences of changes in biodiversity: A search for
general principles”, Ecological Society of America, Vol. 80, No. 5: 1455-1474.
Voute, A.D (1946), “Regulation of the density of the insect populations in virgin forests and
cultivated woods”, Archives Neerlandaises de Zoologie, 7, 435-470.
Watts, D (2002), “A simple model of global cascades on random networks”, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 9: 5766-5771.
Watts, D.J and Strogatz, S.H (1998), “Collective dynamics of 'small-world' networks”,
Nature 393 (6684): 409–10.
Wheelis, M (2002), “Biological warfare at the 1346 Siege of Caffa”, Emerging Infectious
Diseases, Vol. 8, No.9.
Worm, B, Barbier, E.B, Beaumont, N, Emmett Duffy, Folke C, Halpern, B.S, Jackson,
J.B.C, Lotze, H.K, Micheli, F, Palumbi, S.R, Sala, E, Selkoe, K.A and Stachowicz, J.J
(2006), “Impacts of biodiversity loss on ocean ecosystem services”, Science, Vol. 314: 787790.
TABLES:
Table 1: Summary Statistics on the Global Financial Network

1985

1995

2005

Skewness

7.4

8.0

3.1

Kurtosis

71.3

80.6

14.3

Average path length

1.55

1.44

1.37

20

BIS Review 53/2009

Table 2: Climbing the Complexity Tree

Typical contract details(a)
[1]

Pages in CDO^2 prospectus

300

[2]

Pages in ABS CDO prospectus

300

[3]

Pages in RMBS prospectus

200

[4]

Number of ABS CDO tranches in
CDO^2

125

[5]

Number of RMBS in a typical CDO

150

[6]

Number of mortgages in typical
RMBS

5,000

Metrics of complexity(a)
[1] + [3]*[5]*[2]*[4] Pages to read for a CDO^2 investor

1,125,000,300

[2] + [3]*[5]

Pages to read for an ABS CDO
investor

30,300

[4]*[5]*[6]

Max. number of mortgages in a
CDO^2(b)

93,750,000

[5]*[6]

Max. number of mortgages in an
ABS CDO(c)

750,000

Sources: Bloomberg, deal documents and Bank calculations

(a) CDO^2 is used as short-hand for CDO of ABS CDO.
(b) Assuming there is no overlap in the composition of the RMBS pools that back the CDO or
the CDO pools that back the CDO^2.
(c) Assuming there is no overlap in the composition of the RMBS pools that back the CDO.

BIS Review 53/2009

21

Table 3: Range of CDS Premia (bp) and Central Counterparties

Low
uncertainty
around
counterparties'
inter-linkages

High
uncertainty
around
counterparties'
inter-linkages

Probability of
counterparties
defaulting

Number of counterparties
1

2

10

50

1%

0

2

0

0

5%

0

10

2

0

10%

0

18

6

2

30%

0

42

44

43

1%

0

3

9

18

5%

0

14

39

60

10%

0

27

68

87

30%

0

63

127

136

Probability of reference entity defaulting = 10%; Loss given default rate =
50%;

Charts:
Chart 1: Global Financial Network: 1985

22

BIS Review 53/2009

Chart 2: Global Financial Network: 1995

Chart 3: Global Financial Network: 2005

BIS Review 53/2009

23

Chart 4: CDS Premia and Network
Uncertainty – Pre-crisis

Chart 5: CDS Premia and Network
Uncertainty – Post-crisis

bps
500
Size of range of CDS prem ia

S ize of range of CDS prem ia

bps
500
400
300
200
100
0
50

400
300
200
100
0
50

40

0.5
30

0.4

20
Number of counterparties

10
0

40

0.5
30

0.3
0.2
0.1
0 Default probability of reference entity (p)

0.4

20
Number of counterparties 10
0

0.3
0.2
0.1
0 Default probability of reference entity (p)

Chart 6: Financial Contract Design

CDO

FINANCIAL ECONOMY

ABCP
Senior
ABS/CDO
tranches

Senior
AAA

(and
bank debt/
capital)

Capital
Notes

CDO2
Senior
Mezzanine
Equity

CDO
mezzanine
tranches

Mezzanine
tranche
Equity

Principal
protected
notes

CDO
equity
tranches

Leveraged
loans

Mezz/second
lien debt
HY bonds

MTNs

Corporate
assets

Mezzanine
Equity
HY bonds

CDO of ABS

HEL ABS/CMBS

Senior
Senior

CPPI on CDO equity

24

Leveraged
loans

LBO’d company

REAL ECONOMY

SIV

BBB- rated
HEL ABS/
CMBS
or
synthetic

Sub-prime
mortgages/
Mezzanine Commercia
(often BBB-) l mortgages

Mezzanine
Equity
Equity

BIS Review 53/2009

Chart 7: Weighted-average Cumulative Total Returns
Large Complex Financial Institutions
Banks excl. LCFIs
Insurers
Hedge Funds

Cumulative return
200%
150%
100%
50%
0%
-50%

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

09

Source: Bloomberg, CreditSuisse/Tremont and Bank calculations.
(a) Sample based on banks and insurers in S&P 500, FTSE All Share and DJ EuroSTOXX indices as at March
2009. Excludes firms for which returns not quoted over entire sample period.

Chart 8: Global Banks’ Size and Capital Ratios (a)
Tier 1 Ratio (%)
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5
2.0
Total Assets (£trn)

Source: Bankscope
(a) As at end 2007 due to data availability

BIS Review 53/2009

25

Chart 9: Global Banks’ Size and Leverage ratios(a)

Tier 1 Ratio (%)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.0

0.3

0.6

0.9

1.2

1.5

1.8

Total Assets (£trn)

Source: Bankscope
(a) As at end 2007 due to data availability

Chart 10: Global Banks’ Size and Government support (a)

Support rating
4

3

2

1

0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0
1.2
1.4
Total Assets (£ trn)

Source: Bankscope and Fitch
(a) As at end 2006. Government support proxied by Fitch’s ‘support rating’. A higher number is a lower level of
support.

26

BIS Review 53/2009

Charles Bean: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor (Monetary Policy) of the Bank of England, at
Cutlers’ Feast, Cutlers’ Hall, Sheffield, 21 May 2009.
*

*

*

Master Cutler, Lord Lieutenant, High Sheriff, Lord Mayor, My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen.
I am very grateful to you, Master Cutler, for inviting me here to Sheffield to speak at this great
annual Feast, to meet the leaders of such an important sector of British manufacturing
industry, and to enjoy your magnificent hospitality.
We are now almost two years into the financial crisis, which broke in August 2007. The
preceding decade or so was marked by steady growth and low inflation, not just in the United
Kingdom but in many other parts of the world. In 2003, the Bank’s Governor, Mervyn King,
even went so far as to christen it the NICE decade – standing for non-inflationary consistently
expansionary. He was at pains to point out that one should not expect that unusual stability
to be maintained. But although we subsequently fretted about the vulnerabilities building up
within the global financial system as a result of the relaxed attitude to risk and the easy
availability of credit, we never imagined quite how extreme the unwinding would prove,
particularly after the bankruptcy of Lehman's last September triggered a near collapse of the
financial system and a world-wide plunge in business and consumer confidence. The result
has been a sharp and synchronised contraction in economic activity across the globe and an
unprecedented collapse in world trade.
In the twelve months following the onset of the crisis, it seemed natural to expect those
countries where the build-up in debt had been greatest, such as the United States and the
United Kingdom, and those sectors that seemed most exposed, particularly financial services
and construction, to be the hardest hit. But that is not how it turned out. The fall in UK GDP of
nearly 3½% over the final quarter of last year and the first quarter of 2009 represents the
largest half-yearly decline since records began in 1955. But that is comparatively mild seen
alongside falls of almost 6% in Germany and nearly 8% in Japan, both countries running
consistent current account surpluses.
Moreover, as most of you will be only too aware, the downturn has hit manufacturing
especially hard, with output in that sector down over 10% in the UK, 20% in Germany and
30% in Japan, reflecting the sharp decline in the demand for consumer durables and capital
equipment that followed the loss in confidence and reduction in the availability of credit.
Rigorous inventory control then propagated the fall in demand rapidly along globalised
supply chains.
Now producers cannot run down inventories indefinitely, so the rate of contraction should
start to ease as de-stocking slows. And indeed, business surveys around the world do
suggest that the rate of contraction in activity has been moderating over the past few months
and that business confidence has started to improve. So the bottom in economic activity may
not be too far off.
Unfortunately these encouraging signs – I hesitate to identify them as “green shoots” – do
not tell us much about the strength and durability of the subsequent recovery. Here there are
reasons for both caution and optimism.
The main reason for caution lies in the nature of this downturn. Previous UK recessions were
associated with the need to reduce inflation after a period of excess demand growth. But the
period preceding the present crisis was not associated with excessively rapid growth in the
demand for goods and services. Instead, it was characterised by excessive growth in the
demand for financial and real assets, and in the prices of those assets. All of that went into

BIS Review 62/2009

1

reverse after August 2007, with a sharp reversal in perceptions of risk, falls in asset prices, a
deterioration in banks’ balance sheets, and a drying up of credit.
The Senior Warden, in his introduction, drew attention to the harm that the reduction in the
availability of credit is having on otherwise viable businesses in this part of the country. We
hear the same message repeatedly across the nation through the business contacts of our
network of regional Agents. The issue is very much at the forefront of our concerns.
The UK Government has already introduced a range of measures to underpin the banking
system, including requiring the injection of additional capital, guaranteeing bank debt and
providing insurance against losses on some of the risky assets on banks’ balance sheets.
That has served to stabilise the banking system. But we are still some way from having
banks that feel sufficiently secure that they can lend normally, and investors that have
enough confidence in the banks to provide them with sufficient funds. The Bank will continue
to work alongside the Government and the FSA in trying to ensure an adequate flow of funds
to business. Unfortunately, past experience in other countries suggests that it often takes
time for the banking system to mend after a crisis, and it is possible that the supply of credit
will remain impaired for some while.
There are two reasons for optimism about the strength of the recovery. First, we have the
advantage of a substantial depreciation in sterling, whose trade-weighted value is about a
quarter down on its value before the crisis broke. That should encourage buyers to switch to
goods and services made in this country and make it more profitable to produce them. As a
result, it should facilitate the necessary re-balancing of the economy.
Second, an unprecedented policy stimulus is working its way through. In particular, the
Monetary Policy Committee has lowered Bank Rate to 0.5%, a level unmatched in the Bank's
315-year history and only marginally above its floor of zero. But given the strong
contractionary tendencies in the economy, we decided that further stimulus was needed. So
in March, we announced a programme to purchase £75 bn of public and private financial
assets, financed by issuing extra Bank of England reserves – an action going by the unlovely
description of Quantitative Easing. And at our meeting at the beginning of this month, we
upped the total amount of purchases to £125 bn, about half of which have so far been made.
The ultimate aim of these measures is to boost the annual rate of growth of nominal
spending in the economy, which has been roughly flat over the past year, to a level
consistent with a sustainable level and rate of growth of real activity and inflation meeting our
target.
Quantitative easing has been described in some quarters as “printing money”, though it is not
literally that. It is more akin to us buying the asset with a cheque drawn on the Bank of
England, which the seller then deposits with his own bank. As a consequence, the quantity of
bank deposits in the economy goes up, while the claims that the banks hold on the Bank of
England also increase.
The immediate impact of these purchases should be to drive up the price of the assets that
we are buying, or equivalently to reduce their yield. That is indeed what we have seen, with
gilt yields falling nearly ½ percentage point when the programme was initiated. But that is not
the end of the matter, as investors need to do something with the proceeds from their asset
sales. They could just sit on the proceeds, but it is more likely that in due course they will buy
other assets, including those that offer a higher return. So, in the course of time, the whole
range of equity and bond prices are driven up, lowering the cost of finance to companies and
increasing its availability.
Our purchases of corporate assets are intended to have the additional effect of improving the
functioning of those markets. By standing ready to buy commercial paper and corporate
bonds, we hope to improve their liquidity, lowering the spread above safe assets of
equivalent maturity, and with it the cost of finance to business.

2

BIS Review 62/2009

There are signs that these measures are having a beneficial impact too. Spreads on
commercial paper eligible for purchase have fallen by around ½ percentage point and the
size of the market has increased by around 10%. Similarly, average spreads on sterling
investment grade corporate bonds for industrial companies have declined by some 60 basis
points and gross issuance of bonds by UK companies has been strong. These developments
may reflect a range of influences, but feedback from market participants suggests that our
purchases have indeed played a helpful role.
In addition to these channels, the banks, finding themselves flush with extra reserves, may
choose to lend them on, providing a further kick by boosting the supply of credit. At the
current juncture, however, a scarcity of funding and capital is likely to make banks cautious
about doing this. That was exactly what happened in Japan during its so-called “lost decade”.
But there are signs that the extra reserves may be contributing to a decline in the interest
rate that banks pay to borrow from each other.
It will take some time before we can assess just how effective Quantitative Easing has
proved to be. Our latest assessment is that the combined stimulus from policy easing and the
lower value of sterling should be sufficient to lead to growth resuming as we move towards
the end of the year. But the continuing drag from the financial sector means that the ensuing
pickup is likely to take place relatively slowly. There is, however, considerable uncertainty
surrounding that assessment.
Our primary objective is, of course, to control inflation, not growth. Our target measure, the
Consumer Price Index, has been running above the 2% target for the past eighteen months,
reflecting in particular the surge in energy and other commodity prices during the first part of
last year. But it is now dropping back, reflecting both the sharp decline in energy prices in the
latter part of 2008 and the growing margin of spare capacity in the economy. We expect it
soon to fall below target and it is more likely than not to remain there for the next year or two.
The inflation rate as measured by the more familiar Retail Prices Index has fallen even more
sharply, reflecting the reduction in mortgage interest payments associated with the reduction
in Bank Rate and falling house prices.
When the recovery does come, as it surely will, the margin of spare capacity in the economy
will begin to shrink and inflationary pressures will start to build again. So at some stage, we
will have to begin withdrawing the large monetary stimulus. Although this may be some way
in the future, some market participants and commentators are already starting to worry about
whether we will be willing and able to accomplish this sufficiently rapidly to prevent inflation
taking off, particularly given the scale of the Government’s prospective financing needs.
Three points are worth making.
First, the timing of the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus will be governed by the need to
meet the MPC’s inflation objective, not by the Government’s financing needs.
Second, with Bank Rate at its effective floor, we presently have only the asset purchase
programme as a tool to stimulate demand. But when it comes to tightening policy, we have
two instruments at our disposal: asset sales; and raising Bank Rate. It is not necessary to
unwind the asset purchases before raising Bank Rate.
Third, if we felt the need to drain the extra reserves from the system rapidly, we could also do
it by exchanging the reserves for short-term Bank of England bills, allowing us to stagger the
sales of the gilts.
Of course, the execution of our exit strategy will still present us with a tricky judgement call.
We do not want to nip a recovery in the bud prematurely. Equally we will not want to let the
inflation genie out of the bottle. But that is the sort of balancing act that monetary policy
makers regularly face, even if the scale of the downturn and the size of the policy stimulus
that has to be withdrawn are so much larger now.
A previous guest at this Feast, Winston Churchill, declared that he “would rather see finance
less proud and industry more content”, shortly before he took the fateful decision to return

BIS Review 62/2009

3

the pound to the gold standard at an overvalued rate. Finance has certainly been humbled by
the events of the past couple of years and the post-crisis financial world is bound to look very
different from the pre-crisis one. But let us also hope that it is a world in which industry is
more content.
It remains only for me to thank you again for a marvellous meal and to propose a toast. To
the Manufacturing Industries of Hallamshire.

4

BIS Review 62/2009

Paul Tucker: The repertoire of official sector interventions in the financial
system – last resort lending, market-making, and capital
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor, Financial Stability, of the Bank of England, at
the Bank of Japan 2009 International Conference “Financial System and Monetary Policy:
Implementation”, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, 27-28 May 2009.
*

*

*

Everything – and I mean everything – about central banking stems from our liabilities being
the base money of the economy. From this flow our roles in monetary policy and financial
stability. And, in consequence, the manner in which central banks supply our money –
overnight, intra-day, and for term maturities; in routine and in various stressed circumstances
– just could not matter more, even if much of the time it seems like an obscure corner of the
financial system’s plumbing.
About half a decade ago, I set out the thinking that underpins the Bank of England’s
management of our balance sheet, focusing principally on the implementation of monetary
policy. 1 Today I want to explain how, over the past eighteen months, we have developed our
system for providing liquidity insurance to banks in the interests of preserving financial
stability; and how that bears on the prudential regulation of banks’ liquidity. From that
discussion of LOLR as Bagehot would have recognised it 2 , I shall go on to air some
developing thinking about two other instruments available to the authorities to address
financial system distress: Market Maker of Last Resort, and Capital of Last Resort.
The implementation of monetary policy in stressed conditions
Most of the time, central bank operations revolve around the implementation of monetary
policy. For the Bank of England, in routine circumstances that means, of course, establishing
overnight money market interest rates in line with the Monetary Policy Committee’s policy
rate (Bank Rate). It is vital that we should be able to achieve that primary rate-setting
Objective in stressed conditions, as well as in peacetime.
Since mid-decade, the reserves part of the Bank of England’s operational framework has,
accordingly, made explicit provision for three broad types of contingency: a bank finding itself
temporarily short of reserves at the end of the banking day due to technical problems or
frictions in the money markets; a widespread shock to the sector’s demand for reserves; and,
thirdly, a pronounced shift in the degree to which banks collectively find themselves needing
to manage their reserves directly with the Bank rather than via the money markets. To cater
for those eventualities, banks can, first, borrow unlimited amounts overnight against the
highest-quality collateral, for a modest premium of 25 basis points, designed to leave intact
incentives to manage liquidity in the markets rather than with us. Second, banks can
increase the size of the precautionary balances or buffer they hold with the Bank by altering
their reserves targets in our voluntary reserves system. 3 And, third, in the face of, say, a

1

“Managing the central bank’s balance sheet: where monetary policy meets financial stability”, Lecture to mark
the fifteenth anniversary of Lombard Street Research, London, July 2004, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,
Autumn 2004, pp359-382.

2

So I am using the expression in its older, broader sense, not narrowly to mean bespoke support operations.

3

Under the Bank of England’s Sterling Monetary Framework, individual reserves banks choose each month a
level of reserves they wish to target on average over a month-long maintenance period running between
Monetary Policy Committee meetings. The Bank supplies, via OMOs, the resulting aggregate level of
reserves. In stressed circumstances, the Bank can permit a revision to the target during the monthly

BIS Review 67/2009

1

9/11-type event that disrupted the financial infrastructure and effectively closed the money
markets, the Bank could temporarily substitute itself for the markets by allowing banks to
borrow from, and deposit with, us at no charge relative to Bank Rate. 4
Beyond monetary policy
All of those contingencies involve events affecting either the demand for reserves or their
distribution around the system. And the measures designed to cope with them are therefore
part and parcel of the Bank’s management of the banking system’s day-to-day sterling
liquidity in the course of implementing monetary policy. Of course, that is helpful to – indeed,
is a necessary condition for – the maintenance of financial stability. Most obviously, during
the current crisis banks chose to more than double their targets for reserves balances with
the Bank in the months following August 2007, and we injected the required increase in
money into the system. That was necessary to keep overnight rates broadly in line with Bank
Rate; and it was also necessary, although not sufficient, to stabilise the short-term money
markets and the banking system. But, as the past 18 months or so have demonstrated,
contingency plans centred on managing reserves by no means exhaust the range of market
operations and facilities available to central banks to reduce the economic costs of severe
disruptions to the financial system.
While not explicitly directed to managing day-to-day monetary conditions, those wider
measures absolutely must, nevertheless, be constructed to be consistent with, and
supportive of, monetary policy.
Financial stability and commercial banks
How best to construct those facilities turns in part on how we think about financial stability,
and so I should probably be clear about the definition of financial stability I employ. It is
largely to do with money and the role of the banking system in a monetary economy.
Monetary policy is, of course, directed to ensuring stability in the value of central bank money
relative to goods and services. Analogously, in significant degree financial stability is about
safeguarding the stability of private money (deposits held by households and firms with the
banking system) relative to central bank money. Depositors with banks have to be confident
that they can exchange their deposits at face value for our money – our notes; or that they
can smoothly transfer their deposits to other banks where they could be confident of that.
Those two formulations amount to much the same thing, as transfers between banks are
settled across our books in central bank money, the economy’s ultimate settlement asset. 5 At
the level of the system, we need an “exchange rate” of unity between private money and
central bank money. And we need wholesale funders of banks to be confident of that too.
Absent that stability and confidence, the payments system and credit creation become
severely disrupted, with big social costs.
Of course, banks are not the only lenders in our economies. The current crisis owes a lot to
the non-bank financial sector – funds, conduits, SIVs, securities dealers, and so on. But the
excessive leverage and maturity transformation in the shadow banking system was in
general predicated on the plentiful availability of credit on too-easy terms from the

maintenance period. For more details see paragraphs 74-81 of “The Framework for the Bank of England’s
Operations in the Sterling Money Markets (the ‘Red Book’)”, Bank of England.
4

Ibid., paragraph 166.

5

Transfers in the main sterling payment systems are settled gross in real time across the Bank’s balance sheet.
For members of the real-time system, no credit exposures amongst them arise. Transfers between smaller
banks are settled across the balance sheets of big commercial banks. The banking sector would probably be
more resilient if all banks joined the RTGS system.

2

BIS Review 67/2009

commercial banking system. Up to a point, the same goes for the abundant liquidity in asset
markets that preceded the crisis. Of course, persistently strong demand for financial assets –
crudely, rising prices – created liquidity. But, beyond that, the willingness and terms on which
“market-makers” and traders underpinned liquidity depended on generous access to credit
for financing inventory and positions. And the ultimate private sector providers of such credit
are always the commercial banks. 6
So commercial banks are special. They are special because their deposit liabilities are
money. But they are also inherently fragile. First, as monetary institutions, the liquidity
insurance they provide, via demand deposits and committed on-demand lines of credit,
entails large mismatches between the maturities of their liabilities and assets (actual and
contingent). The accompanying conversion of liquid savings into illiquid loans to households
and firms benefits society. But it also exposes the banks to big liquidity risks. Given a first
come-first served system of redemption for retail and wholesale deposits, that creates the
risk of runs. Secondly, a deposit-taking institution is leveraged, even if it does not fund itself
in wholesale markets: retail deposits are debt. So banks’ capital adequacy can quickly be
imperilled by a fall in asset prices. In that sense, the “liquidity” and “solvency” explanations of
the current crisis are inseparable. Especially in a world in which banks’ trading portfolios are
marked to market, a drying up of liquidity in markets brings about a fall in asset prices, and
so a depletion of banks’ net worth. All that underlines just why our predecessors placed such
great weight on official interventions to maintain the safety and soundness of banks. 7 If
anyone doubted it, this crisis underlines how problems of funding liquidity, asset-market
liquidity and solvency are intertwined. And those dimensions of a systemic crisis map into the
authorities’ capability, in principle, to be a Lender of Last Resort; a Market Maker of Last
Resort; and a provider of Capital of Last Resort.
Central bank provision of liquidity insurance, and LOLR
Bagehot’s famous dictum, in Lombard Street, was that, to avert panic, central banks should
lend early and freely (ie without limit), to solvent firms, against good collateral, and at “high
rates”. One of his great themes was that the Bank of England should acknowledge its role in
stemming panics, and set out its principles for doing so: “The Bank has never laid down any
clear or sound policy on the subject.” 8
Over the past fifteen years or so, including during the current crisis, the Bank of England has
taken steps to make the Bank’s principles clearer. 9 Most recently, we have also addressed

6

For example, see Brunnermeier M K and Pedersen L H (2008), “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity”, The
Society for Financial Studies, Oxford University Press.

7

Bank supervision has its origins not in consumer protection but in preserving stability (and protecting the
central bank against risks incurred through its open market operations and discount window lending). This was
evident in the remarks, just over twenty years ago, of George Blunden, the Bank’s then Deputy Governor and,
a decade earlier, the founding Chairman of the Basel Committee: “Supervisory standards are set not only with
an eye to what is required to protect depositors with individual institutions, looked at in the narrow context of
their own operations, but also with an eye to protecting them from problems which could be created by wider,
systemic, developments. A bank may consider a course of action it wishes to take to be acceptable – as it
may well be in a limited context. But the same course might, if widely copied by other banks, have unfortunate
effects on the banking system as a whole. It is part of the supervisors’ job to take that wider, systemic view
and sometimes to curb practices which even prudent banks might, if left to themselves, regard as safe.” See,
Blunden G, “Supervision and Central Banking”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, August 1987.

8

Page 206 of the 1999 paperback reprint of Bagehot (1873), “Lombard Street” in the Wiley Investment Classics
series.

9

For example, see Eddie George’s 1993 lecture “The pursuit of financial stability”; Mervyn King’s September
2007 letter to the Treasury Select Committee, “Turmoil in financial markets: what can central banks do?”; and,
most recently, the document on the Bank’s liquidity insurance facilities, “The Development of the Bank of

BIS Review 67/2009

3

some difficult issues around the transparency of collateral policy, and about how to avoid
incentivising imprudent liquidity management.
The time-consistency problem and collateral policy
Like so much in central banking, time-consistency is at the centre of it.
That a time-consistency problem can bedevil monetary policy is well known 10 , and motivates
an institutional framework in which independent central banks have clear mandates for
fighting inflation. Much less is said about what might be equally serious time-consistency
problems in the sphere of financial stability. They can be especially apparent in central
banks’ collateral policy.
Given banks’ incomplete cover against their maturity mismatch, central banks have long
stood ready to “discount” – or lend against the collateral of – certain assets in unlimited
amounts. But central banks have also long been worried that, left to themselves, banks will
try to avoid holding the best-quality, most liquid assets, because they yield less.
If, in an attempt to induce banks to hold truly liquid assets, the central bank were to declare
that it would lend against only the highest-quality collateral, the banking system would know
that those assets could be converted into money in all circumstances. But if an otherwise
solvent bank gets into trouble and still faces a liquidity problem after taking all of its eligible
high-quality assets to the central bank, the authorities face a choice between letting it fail
through a lack of liquidity or lending against a wider class of assets. Their choice will turn on
an assessment of the trade off between, on the one hand, the risk of financial instability
today that could flow from immediate bank failures and, on the other hand, the risk of
financial instability in the future that may flow from the central bank being seen to protect
banks from their mistakes. 11 If during peacetime a bank judges that its failure would be likely
to cause widespread systemic distress, it will probably conclude that the central bank’s
collateral policy will, during wartime, be relaxed, leading it to choose to hold less of the
highest-quality eligible assets than otherwise. Crucially, the central bank may then, after all,
not be able to stick to its declared collateral policy, just as the bank suspected. In other
words, a central bank policy of lending against only the best assets is likely to prove time
inconsistent when it comes to the crunch.
This is not an ivory tower problem. It is a real problem.
It is why the Bank of England confirmed last year that we do stand ready, via our public
facilities, to lend against a wide range of collateral, subject crucially to appropriate haircuts
and other terms. To do otherwise would be futile; it would lack credibility. And to do so is
consistent with Bagehot’s dictum that central banks should lend against “everything which in
common times is good ‘banking security’ ”. 12
The Bank has already published an initial list of collateral eligible in its dedicated liquidityinsurance facilities. Looking ahead, the Bank plans to expand the list, and to promulgate
detailed eligibility criteria reflecting its risk tolerance and experience gained from managing

England’s Market Operations: A consultative paper by the Bank of England”, October 2008. Mark Carney,
Governor of the Bank of Canada, has also set out his principles for the Bank of Canada’s liquidity provision.
10

Broadly, if the monetary authority thinks it can achieve above “trend” output growth or employment for a while
by reducing interest rates, it may be tempted to let inflation temporarily rise above the rate it has promised to
deliver. But people get used to this – or, in models, anticipate it – and so the extra inflation is simply built into
their wage and price setting, without any benefit to output or jobs, but at the cost of a higher steady-state
inflation rate.

11

This is discussed in Mervyn King’s 2007 letter to the Treasury Select Committee.

12

Page 205 of the 1999 paperback reprint of Bagehot (1873), “Lombard Street” in the Wiley Investment
Classics series.

4

BIS Review 67/2009

assets and collateral. In doing so, the Bank recognises that its decisions will have a bearing
on the development of markets. For example, for securitised assets, the Bank plans in due
course to establish criteria for both the structure of the securitisations and the composition of
the underlying portfolios that it will lend against.
The Bank’s Discount Window Facility and wider-collateral OMOs: adverse incentives
and the terms of liquidity insurance
These expansions of the Bank of England’s facilities have required us to be much clearer
than, perhaps, ever before about the terms on which we insure against liquidity risk.
As with other types of insurance, without care central banks’ provision of insurance could
inadvertently have the perverse effect of reducing banks’ incentives to contain their
exposures to liquidity risk in the first place – no doubt bringing the banks temporarily higher
profits, but increasing the potential costs to the wider economy of those liquidity risks
crystallising. For broadly similar reasons, we have had to think hard about how to protect the
Bank against excessive risk (via eligibility criteria, haircuts, price etc).
The principles that underpin the design of the Bank’s facilities, set out last October, are
basically as follows:
•

They should absolutely not cut across, and should ideally support, monetary policy.

•

Crucially, the terms of such liquidity insurance should balance its benefits against the
costs of creating incentives for banks to take more liquidity risk than otherwise.

•

The Bank should be, and is, prepared to lend against a wide class of collateral
subject to applying appropriate haircuts, and provided that we are capable of valuing
it and of managing it in the event of a counterparty default. (One of the great
problems in our capital markets is that too many firms forgot that collateral and
haircuts matter only when a counterparty defaults.)

•

Such lending against wider collateral should be for term maturities, as lending in
stressed circumstances for only very short maturities creates rollover risk and so may
be ineffective in forestalling panic.

•

Liquidity-insurance facilities that are permanently available should be delivered via
secured loans (repo or collateral swaps) rather than outright purchases, as during the
life of a loan we can update the collateral margins and other terms that control the
risk to the Bank.

•

Permanent facilities providing bilateral liquidity insurance should be made available
only to commercial banks, as they unavoidably need such insurance given that their
liabilities are money and the vital role they play, as monetary institutions, in the
economy and the financial system. (Private-sector institutions seeking to offer
monetary (deposit) services should be regulated as banks. 13 )

•

Such public facilities should not be available to banks where in the judgment of the
Bank there are serious question-marks over their viability or solvency. (That need not
exhaust our menu for providing liquidity to individual firms. It is of course open to us
to offer that via bespoke support operations. 14 )

13

This suggests, for example, that constant-NAV money market mutual funds should convert into banks or
switch to being variable-NAV funds. Arguably, similar principles should apply to other non-bank banks. See
Tucker PMWT (2009), “Remarks at the Turner Review Conference by Paul Tucker”, Bank of England. Paul
Volker’s recent Group of Thirty report also argues for this.

14

This can be effected under the Tripartite Memorandum of Understanding between the UK’s Tripartite
authorities (HMT, FSA and Bank).

BIS Review 67/2009

5

Consistent with those Design Principles, during the current crisis we added to the Bank of
England’s Sterling Monetary Framework two instruments that are explicitly designed to help
contain financial system stress, by providing financing against securities that may become
illiquid in stressed conditions:
•

A Discount Window Facility (DWF) making available to commercial banks collateral
swaps in which the Bank can lend UK government securities in exchange for a wide
range of eligible collateral.

•

Long-term repos (LTRs) via which the Bank lends cash against collateral comprising
a range of high-quality securities going beyond the sovereign securities routinely
eligible in the Bank’s short-term repo operations.

For the Bank’s short-term repos, eligible collateral has not been widened: it remains
essentially high-quality government bonds. That is because the purpose of the weekly shortterm OMOs is to manage the Bank’s net supply of reserves rather than to provide broader
liquidity insurance.
Liquidity insurance and monetary policy
The two new facilities differ from each other in so far as the long-term repos (LTRs) are for a
total size determined by the Bank, whereas drawings from the Discount Window Facility are
for amounts determined by individual counterparties; and in that the Bank lends cash via the
LTRs, whereas we would usually lend securities via the DWF. That affects their interaction
with monetary policy. In the case of the DWF, we lend securities (gilts) that are eligible in our
OMOs, so they can be turned into cash either in the market or via our repo operations. But,
in its usual mode of operation, the DWF does not directly affect the Bank’s aggregate supply
of reserves. 15 Indirectly, it may even reduce the demand for reserves, as it gives sound
banks a source of liquidity insurance separate from holding precautionary balances with the
Bank.
By contrast, the wider-collateral LTR OMOs do inject reserves. For a given monthly reserves
target, that means that, other things being equal, the Bank has to reduce the size of its
weekly short-term OMOs, in order to ensure that its net supply of reserves is equal to the
target; otherwise overnight rates would sink below the MPC’s policy rate. But when, as
during the current crisis, the scale of wider-collateral repos is massively increased, reducing
short-term repos to zero is not always enough to achieve our monetary objective. The Bank
of England has therefore introduced the sale, via auction, of very short-term Bank of England
bills to drain excess (ie above target) reserves from the market. That has enabled us to make
a very significant (order of magnitude) discretionary increase in our cash-liquidity insurance
without cutting across monetary policy. (In my view that is preferable, on technical and
presentational grounds, to draining the market by HMG depositing with the Bank the
proceeds of increased Treasury issuance, which could be confused with deficit-financing
operations.) In economic terms, the net effect for the system in aggregate is to inject
reserves against wider-collateral up to some targeted level consistent with monetary policy,
together with a further collateral swap of Bank bills against wider-collateral. But the structure
employed has distributional benefits too.
Haircuts
Consistency with monetary policy is one constraint on our provision of liquidity insurance.
Controlling our risk is another. For its loan (repo and swap) operations, the Bank uses

15

The Bank has retained discretion to lend cash via the DWF in various circumstances, including where the gilt
repo market was not functioning.

6

BIS Review 67/2009

valuations, 16 haircuts and daily remargining to leave financial risk with its counterparties.
Haircuts can be based on past volatility and on scenario or stress analysis. We increase
haircuts for own-name securities, where a market price can no longer be observed, or
sometimes in the light of the particular circumstances of individual counterparties. Consistent
with its role as central bank, the Bank aims thereby to unbundle liquidity risk from credit and
valuation risk. And that means we do not, and could not, lend 100% of our valuation of the
collateral, which is a constraint on the scale of the liquidity insurance we provide.
Haircuts are kept under review, and the Bank reserves the right to alter them, including on
outstanding transactions. Looking ahead, the Bank aims to take into account structural and
cyclical changes in financial conditions. In the future, the Bank might, for example, increase
haircuts during “peacetime” if liquidity in the secondary market from a particular type of
collateral became impaired; or if the Bank concluded that, as the upswing of a credit cycle
developed, risk was plausibly becoming underpriced and so was not properly reflected in the
valuations of instruments it was accepting as collateral. Whether or not that would be enough
of itself quell a cycle is obviously uncertain; but it would help to protect us against risk and
would give a signal.
In short, haircut policy matters.
Pricing
But the Bank does not believe that haircuts can be relied upon on their own to produce the
appropriate incentives for banks’ liquidity management. Price matters too. Bagehot said that
the rate should be “high”. But since he wrote in the context of the Gold Standard and of
domestic financial crises that were typically accompanied by external (or capital account)
crises, his notion of a “high rate” was bound up with the central bank tightening monetary
conditions to stem the outflows (of gold). But it is clear enough that, although he did not in
fact talk of “penalty” rates, the relevant measure for him was the rate charged by the central
bank relative to that prevailing in the market in normal conditions, ie before a crisis breaks.
The Bank has adopted, and promulgated, a fee structure for its liquidity-insurance facilities
that increases as banks’ borrowing increases and/or is made against riskier, less liquid
collateral. That is designed to underpin incentives for banks to manage liquidity risk
prudently, in the long-run interests not only of the banking system but of the wider economy.
We have published a schedule for DWF pricing with those properties, structured around four
broad classes of collateral, grouped according to their liquidity/risk characteristics. 17 We plan,
after consultation, to introduce an auction structure for the wider-collateral long-term repo
OMOs that delivers the same broad result of counterparties having to pay up to borrow
against less liquid collateral. 18

16

The Bank published its general approach to collateral valuations when it disclosed use of the Special Liquidity
Scheme. It stated: “Securities are valued by the Bank using observed market prices that are independent and
routinely available publicly. The Bank reserves the right to use its own calculated prices, including where such
independent market prices are unavailable. Those calculated prices are designed to deliver valuations taking
account of securities’ contracted cash flows and yields of comparable securities, but not individual loan-byloan analysis of portfolios. To account for the risk that a calculated price is an over-estimate of what a market
price would have been had it existed, an additional haircut is added. The Bank’s valuation of all securities is
binding.” For more details, see the Market Notice for the Special Liquidity Scheme released on 21 April 2008.
www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/sls/index.htm.

17

More information on the Discount Window Facility (DWF) can be found in the Bank’s Market Notice, released
on 19 March 2009. www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/money/discount/index.htm

18

In the auctions there would be separate stop-out rates for lending against liquid and less liquid collateral and
the proportion of the Bank's long-term lending allocated to the different types of collateral would be related to
the spread between the stop-out rates. A high proportion would be allocated to lending against less liquid
collateral only if, given the bids received, there was an appropriately large spread between the stop-out rates.

BIS Review 67/2009

7

Knowledge of the framework’s pricing structure can be factored into banks’ liquidity
management and contingency planning.
Mitigants for the “stigma problem”
But during the turmoil of the past eighteen or so months, around the world banks have at
times been reluctant to pay such “penalty” rates of interest for fear of signalling, if somehow
their use leaks or is revealed by a “witch hunt”, that they have an idiosyncratic problem even
when they don’t. During 2007 this became known as the “stigma problem”, 19 and it caused
standing lending facilities, a key piece of central bank machinery for providing overnight
liquidity to the payments system, to more or less atrophy in some centres during the first
phase of the crisis.
That state of affairs was not sustainable, and it prompted a number of central banks to
innovate. Auctions of funds against wider collateral of the kind introduced by the Fed and the
Bank of England side-step the stigma problem by having a number of banks borrow at the
same time. They have definitely helped to underpin the system. But, compared with a facility,
those auctions are available only periodically – fortnightly in the UK at present – rather than
every day. The DWF is available on a continuous basis, and is designed to avoid the stigma
problem. In particular, in its usual mode of operation, it involves a collateral swap, so there is
no give away of its being used in the size of either the banking system’s reserves balances
or our open market operations. And we publish data on its use on an aggregate, averaged
basis and with a lag. This puts onto a permanent footing some of the technology of the
Bank’s Special Liquidity Scheme, which was used in 2008 to provide 3-year financing, via a
collateral swap, for assets that had become illiquid as a result of the crisis. 20
How the facilities can work in extremely stressed conditions
Monthly, wide-collateral repos for a 3-month maturity and typically of fairly modest size,
together with a continuously available Window for 30-day collateral swaps, are now
permanent features of the Bank of England’s regime. Various parameters can be adapted in
the face of extremely stressed conditions of the kind we have been facing. Thus, the widecollateral repos have been held fortnightly rather than monthly, and for very large sizes. And
the DWF currently offers a 12-month swap option, as well as the standard 30-day facility.
In summary, by providing liquidity insurance the Bank aims effectively to give essentially
sound banks and others time to address the problems created by stress, and for the
authorities to develop remedial plans, without creating perverse incentives or exposing itself
to risk. Given those aims, banks must avail themselves of these facilities. We believe, for
example, that all qualifying banks and building societies should sign up for the Discount
Window Facility; that they should pre-position with us a range of eligible collateral, so that
they avoid operational stumbles when they seek to use the Window; that they should use it
regularly in meaningful size as part of testing and making a reality of their contingency plans;
and that they should share those plans with the Bank, which, amongst other things, would
help us assess applications to draw. In that way, the DWF can truly help to underpin the
system’s liquidity in the future.

19

See Tucker PMWT (2008), “The Structure of Regulation: Lessons from the Crisis of 2007”, a speech to the
LSE’s Financial Markets Group Conference; and the Committee on the Global Financial System, Paper No. 31
(July 2008), “Central bank operations in response to the financial turmoil”, CGFS Papers, Bank for
International Settlements.

20

The SLS was introduced in April 2008 and was open until end-January 2009. It enabled banks to swap legacy
illiquid securities (principally RMBS and covered bonds) for UK Treasury Bills for a period of three years. The
Bank announced in early February that it lent £185bn of TBills, against £287bn (nominal) of collateral.

8

BIS Review 67/2009

Prudential regulation of banks’ liquidity: how it relates to central bank liquidity
insurance
But such insurance is not and cannot be a source of longer-term funding to the banking
system. Prudent valuations and haircuts mean that our insurance cannot finance anything
like the whole of a bank’s balance sheet even in the short run, and also that banks need a
clear buffer of surplus capital. Nor is central bank liquidity insurance always going to work.
That underlines why prudent liquidity management must be a major responsibility of the
banks themselves. In the normal course of their business, they should insure themselves
against liquidity risk in private markets. They can do so by, for example, holding a stock of
assets that can unquestionably be exchanged readily in the financial markets for cash in
anything other than the gravest market distress; by maintaining funding with a prudent
maturity structure relative to that of their assets and contingent commitments; and in the case
of smaller banks, up to a point by buying insurance in the form of completely committed lines
of credit from larger banks, but also crucially by holding unquestionably liquid assets in case
their bank-provider is ailing when they call on the line. 21 Banks earn a return from providing
liquidity services, and so make a trade-off in deciding how much liquidity risk to run. But,
because of the spillover effects from bank failures, the overall social cost of banks’ liquidity
risks crystallising can be considerably greater than the costs for the individual banks
themselves. Regulation by the micro-prudential authorities has been the primary tool for
dealing with that issue.
There is currently a very important, and long overdue, international debate about how to
improve the regulation of liquidity.
I want to dwell today on just one important element of this debate.
This concerns whether or not the assets counted by prudential regulators as part of a bank’s
liquidity buffer should be defined to include all of the assets held by the bank that are eligible
in the operations/facilities of the central banks to which the bank has access. Some argue
that they should. The Bank of England would regard that as a big mistake.
For the reasons I have described, the collateral eligible at most central banks goes way
beyond securities that can be relied upon in stressed conditions to be liquid in private
markets (whether outright or repo). So if they all counted as core-liquidity for regulatory
purposes, banks would in effect be liberated from having to hold a buffer of low-yielding
assets that they could confidently use in the market before they turned to us. That would be a
regime in which central banks would, in effect, be lender of second resort (ie as soon as
some markets closed up) rather than LOLR (broadly understood). The equilibrium would
surely be one in which less of banks’ balance sheets were liquid in the markets than is
desirable; and in which the banking system in aggregate could run excess liquidity risk from
a systemic perspective. Haven’t we seen the results of that already? Isn’t the purpose of
regulatory standards to avoid that?
Our own favored approach is that the regulators should define the “liquidity buffer” to
comprise high-quality securities that can reliably be traded or exchanged in liquid markets,
including in stressed circumstances. In practice, that would mean focusing on government
bonds in many economies. 22

21

See Chapman G, Emblow, A and Michael I (2000), “Banking System Liquidity: Developments and Issues”,
Financial Stability Review, Issue 9, December 2000.

22

Such an approach would be consistent with the 2008 CGFS report on Central Bank Operations on this issue:
“Insofar as central bank actions might lead to degradation of market participants’ management of liquidity and
other risks, a possible offset would be to implement tighter supervisory and prudential policies concerning the
management of liquidity and related risks.” It would also seem to comply with the 2008 BCBS Principles on
Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision, which say that: “With respect to the composition of its liquidity

BIS Review 67/2009

9

That is the approach that the UK’s Financial Services Authority will be adopting in due
course, after a number of years’ discussion. We greatly welcome that outcome. Of course, in
the midst of the crisis, any such requirement has to be carefully transitioned, but the eventual
destination should be clear enough.
For such a policy to deliver its potential, it would be good if regulators, internationally,
required all banks regularly to turn over a meaningful share of their “stock liquidity” in the
market on a reasonably regular basis. That would also help to put banks in a position to reap
the benefits of the Bank’s Discount Window Facility, through which, as I have described,
sound banks can borrow gilts. Frankly, it has been shocking over the past year or so to
discover how many medium-sized banks and building societies did not hold government
bonds or other very high quality assets; or, if they did, how many did not have a regular
presence in the gilt repo market or even had no capacity to repo at all. Turning up in the core
secured-funding markets for the first time for years is an absolute give away of distress. All
that has to change.
Market-maker of Last Resort
What I have said so far could be mistaken to imply that only banking markets matter. That
would be misleading. The capital markets obviously matter too.
Indeed, the current crisis has illustrated just what a mess can result from liquidity draining out
of those markets. Market liquidity is endogenous: participants thinking that it might dry up can
contribute to its doing so. In the early phases of this crisis, by virtue of holding large “trading”
books that were marked to market, banks and other traders found themselves having to
make very large portfolio write downs in the face of sharp rises in liquidity premia in asset
markets. As highly-levered institutions, those mark-downs depleted their net worth to the
point of imperilling solvency. That caused a retrenchment in the availability of credit, helping
to plunge the world economy into recession, and so impairing the value of more traditional
loan books, in a vicious spiral.
So it would have been better if, somehow, we could have preserved the liquidity of the
markets.
Liquidity insurance facilities that underpin banks' funding are obviously helpful to that, as they
increase the probability of bank-dealers being able to finance unwanted inventory. But some
voices have argued that the authorities should act more directly to preserve market liquidity;
or, in other words, that central banks should stand ready to act as a Market Maker of Last
Resort. 23
Certainly, the profound changes in the structure of the financial system over recent decades
should not leave us blindly attached to mid-19 century precepts.
But nor can we be blind to the challenges in embarking on acting as MMLR. In the first place,
whereas lending to a bank does with certainty give that bank more liquidity, entering a
market as a buyer does not automatically enhance the liquidity of that market. Secondly,
whereas central banks can protect themselves against the risk in secured loans by requiring
more collateral if conditions deteriorate, an outright purchase is a one-off transaction; if we
pay too much given the true risk, that’s that.

cushion, a bank should hold a core of the most reliably liquid assets, such as cash and high quality
government bonds or similar instruments, to guard against the most sever stress scenarios”.
23

10

For example see, Buiter W and Sibert A (2007), “The Central Bank as Market Maker of Last Resort”,
Maverecon – Willem Buiter’s Blog (http://maverecon.blogspot.com/2007/08/central-bank-as-market-maker-oflast.html). This section has benefited from internal discussions with Kalin Nikolov and Roger Clews.

BIS Review 67/2009

So this is new territory. Whereas a trawl of the web reveals over 200,000 articles referring to
LOLR, there are around 1,500 mentions of MMLR, most of them published over the past year
or so. 24 And like all new territory, it needs to be thought through. One recent contribution 25
suggested that if the purpose of LOLR in a bank-based system is “to stabilise the balance
sheets of banks”, in a market-based system it should be “to stabilise the limit-order book, by
placing orders to buy”.
By analogy with the more familiar “LOLR” function, the following thoughts suggest
themselves for debate in our community.
First, as with LOLR, central banks cannot engage in MMLR operations if to do so would
interfere with monetary policy. Securities are purchased in exchange for cash, entailing an
injection of reserves into the banking system. That has to be consistent with the target for the
central bank’s net supply of reserves.
Second, a MMLR should aim to charge a penalty (eg buy at a discount) to the fundamental
value of an asset. Put another way, any bid-ask spread should be unattractive relative to
peacetime conditions in private markets.
Third, any purchase (auction) mechanism should be designed to reveal information about the
state of the market and the fairness of prices paid.
Fourth, while the MMLR cannot avoid the risk inherent in outright purchases, it absolutely
must not over reach its capital resources.
Fifth, the MMLR should aim to be catalytic, helping ideally to kick-start the market rather than
replace it.
Sixth, the MMLR should avoid propping up markets that would not be fundamentally viable
once peacetime returns.
I must stress that those are just starters for debate.
But, unfortunately, we cannot always wait for consensus around fully articulated principles.
Recently, in the context of its Asset-Purchase Facility programme, the Bank of England has
embarked on what could, perhaps, be viewed as two variants of MMLR in the sterling
corporate financing markets. Both have been focused on our being a buyer, rather than
operating on both sides of the market, but arguably that is what the various MMLR ideas
really amount to in crisis conditions.
In the first, we offer to buy Commercial Paper at announced spreads, which are designed to
be above those warranted by credit-fundamentals, and above market spreads during
peacetime, but below those prevailing in the market before we stepped in. In other words, we
are ready to lend without charging a hefty liquidity premium, since we are not liquidity
constrained. We offer to buy paper in both the primary market and the secondary market.
The latter is in effect a temporary liquidity facility to money market funds and others, at an
extra cost of 25bp over the fixed spread, and with the aim of increasing their willingness to
buy new paper. The goal has been to stimulate the market to bring market prices to at least
our spreads, with market transactions occurring there or more cheaply. A measure of
success is not how much paper we buy, but whether providing a backstop assists the
functioning of the market.
The Bank’s second facility is in some ways more interesting in the context of the debate
about MMLR. We are acting as a back-stop buyer of sterling corporate bonds, by regularly
holding auctions in individual securities. To protect against risk, the Bank sets (and updates)

24

Many of them by Willem Buiter.

25

Cecchetti S G (2009), “Central Bank Tools and Liquidity Shortages”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Conference, 19-20 February 2009. The quote is from the slides used at the conference.

BIS Review 67/2009

11

reserve prices, which draw on CDS spreads, models of risk etc as well as qualitative
information. The amounts we offer to buy in each auction are small. The objective is explicitly
catalytic. It is to reduce the inventory risk run by bank market-makers in the securities, and to
reduce liquidity risk for market participants more generally. Perhaps the best way to think
about it in the abstract is that it is akin to our stepping into the market with a narrower bidoffer spread than private sector intermediaries would otherwise offer, with a view to those
very same dealers bringing their bid-offer spreads inside ours and to investors reducing the
liquidity premium they require. To the extent that such measures work, liquidity risk for
intermediaries, and so for traders and investors, is reduced; and thus, the spread in
corporate bond yields should decline too. There is some evidence that that has occurred
since we introduced the facility in March, although it is impossible to control for the more
general improvement in global corporate bond markets.
Providing a MMLR facility requires know-how and capital resources. In the UK, the Bank is
equipped to offer MMLR when needed in so far as we have the wherewithal to pay for
whatever we buy using our money (where, as I described earlier, we can sterilise any
monetary effects if we need to). But given the Bank of England’s very small accounting
capital, we have acted on the back of an indemnity from the government. The presence of
tax payer protection is not enough, however, for central banks to ignore risk. Not only does
exposure to reputational risk matter. Central banks should not be involved in providing
facilities which it is clear would be likely to result in a transfer of resources to the private
sector. That is the realm of fiscal policy. Central banks should stick to central banking. In the
Bank of England’s current asset-purchase operations, that is reflected in our remit from the
government focusing on high-quality securities, and in the maximum prices (minimum
spreads) we set.
These considerations need to be weighed very carefully in deciding whether, or how, to
operationalise any MMLR policy. We absolutely must keep a clear line around central
banking. 26
Which brings me to the third “instrument” I want to say something about today.
Capital of Last Resort
However much the authorities do to forestall or alleviate a crisis by providing liquidity, I fear
that we cannot rule out that very rarely the banking system will end up needing to be
supported by some ultimate source of capital. We absolutely must be prepared to let banks
fail when, in systemic terms, it is safe to do so. Such decisions call for technocratic judgment.
But, as we have seen, sometimes disorderly bank insolvencies would bring systemic
distress.
For that reason, at least three things follow. First, each country needs a Special Resolution
Regime for distressed banks, and probably more widely; we cannot rely on general
insolvency law to help control threats to system stability. Thank goodness, the UK now has
such a regime for banks, and the Bank will draw lessons about whether it needs refinement
over time. Second, given the prevalence of internationally active banks in a globalised
economy, national authorities just must be able to work together – in reality; when it matters
– to control the resolution of banks whose activities cross borders. 27 And third, as by now

26

This was re-affimed recently in a joint statement by the US Federal Reserve and the Department of the
Treasury (www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20090323b.htm).

27

Work is underway under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board, which published Principles endorsed by
G20 heads of government in April; and in the Basel Committee of Banking Supervisors. These issues were
also discussed recently by Eric Rosengren, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in a speech at
the Institute of Regulation and Risk, Hong Kong, 5 May 2009 “Challenges in Resolving Systemically Important
Financial Institutions”.

12

BIS Review 67/2009

many others have said, 28 we need to find a solution to Too-Big-To-Fail, or too
interconnected, too complex – however one wants to think about it. That might involve
requiring banks to have credible resolution plans for themselves, with higher regulatory
capital and liquidity charges entailed if they do not.
As we have seen across many countries during the current crisis, governments can
otherwise end up having to provide capital support in order to prevent the financial system
unravelling, with unfathomable costs for the real economy and so for households. The long
lesson of history is that we must build a resilient system; but that we and our successors
would be foolhardy to imagine that governments will never again need to provide capital to
save the day.
If that is right, then society needs principles and policies for what might be called “Capital of
Last Resort”, to sit alongside the Lender of Last Resort (LOLR) principles developed by and
for central banks since the 19th century. Clear and timeless principles in this area barely
exist. There are just 30 or so mentions of COLR on the web.
One possible starting point is how we have learned to think about bespoke liquidity-support
operations. After explicitly recognising that occasionally liquidity support operations can end
up providing de facto risk capital if the recipient deteriorates, the late Eddie George offered
some thoughts on this in 1993; 29 “central banks are not in the business of providing public
subsidy to private shareholders. If we do provide support, we will try to structure it so that any
losses fall first on the shareholders and any benefits come first to us. And any support we
provide will be on terms that are as penal as we can make them, without precipitating the
collapse we are trying to avoid ……… We look for a clean exit. The company may be
required to run down or restructure its operations, under our surveillance, to the point where
it can do without our support. We aim to protect the system, not to keep in being unviable
banking capacity …...” And, paraphrasing Mervyn King in 2007: “if the [authorities] underwrite
any [risk] that threatens to damage the economy as a whole, it encourages the view that as
long as a bank takes the same sort of risks that other banks are taking then it is more likely
that their problems will be insured ex post.”
Extrapolating, common principles for LOLR, MMLR and COLR might include that the terms
must help prevent and contain crises; not incentivise imprudent behaviour; be timeconsistent, which is to say that they must be credible; and lead to an exit strategy.
Elsewhere in the repertoire, we are clear, for example, that the costs of LOLR should fall to
shareholders; and that the costs of deposit insurance should be recovered by levies on the
banking sector as a whole. Building on that, one possible way through the COLR maze might
conceivably be to establish, over the medium term, a regime where the eventual cost of any
COLR would in some way be allocated back to the banking system itself rather than to the
general taxpayer. If it is unavoidable that, instead of allowing banks to fail, the banking
system occasionally needs to be rescued through injections of equity capital, “insurance” is in
effect being extended to ordinary creditors generally and not just to retail depositors. The
funding of that insurance would, perhaps, be extended in a similar fashion. If the authorities
determined that a public equity injection was necessary in order to preserve stability,
government could be authorised to provide the support, but with a right to claim back the
eventual cost, if any, from an increased “insurance” levy on the banking system over a period
of years beginning after the crisis had clearly passed. Under that kind of regime, more of the
cost of banking system failures could fall on the shareholders of banks generally rather than

28

For example, Philipp Hildebrand (Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank) on
5 May 2009, in an interview with Handelsblatt, a German daily newspaper.

29

“The pursuit of financial stability”, LSE lecture by Governor George, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin; and
Mervyn King’s September 2007 letter to the Treasury Select Committee, “Turmoil in financial markets: what
can central banks do?”.

BIS Review 67/2009

13

on the public pursue. Banking sector shareholders collectively would benefit ex ante from the
provision of the insurance to the system as a whole; and ex post from support given to any
particular firms. The authorities would, in effect, loan their capacity to fund and absorb risk to
the banking system for a temporary period during the height of the crisis, but would
eventually be repaid by the system. Banks could take that into account in planning their
businesses; and might, arguably, have an incentive during peacetime to monitor the threats
which their peers posed to stability.
Unlike regular deposit insurance, where the Bank has favoured the UK moving to a degree of
pre-funding of the system, it is less clear that such a regime could or should be pre-funded.
But, as with regular deposit insurance, the question of whether or not any ex post allocation
of costs should somehow be risk based would need to be considered. Indeed, more
generally, including perhaps even for liquidity insurance, we need over time to be clearer
about the principles that drive whether insurance premiums are risk based and collected up
front.
This is obviously difficult territory. There are arguments against any approach along those
lines. I air it not so much a proposal but in the hope of stimulating serious thinking about what
a COLR regime might look like.
If a COLR regime could be devised, it would be very important that it was not overused.
Private sector backstops should be used first; and they could be better designed. One such
approach would be to require banks to take out private capital insurance. This could take a
variety of forms. One idea would be straight capital insurance: ie a commitment from
investment institutions to subscribe when called upon to do so by a bank. As with possible
public sector capital-insurance schemes to be activated only during a systemic crisis, such
private insurance could be linked to maintaining a required minimum capital ratio. A private
scheme of that kind would not work, however, if the insurer could not afford to subscribe
when the call came; or if investment institutions were unwilling to enter into such
commitments on a sufficient scale for the insurance to make a difference to the system’s
resilience. Another idea circulating currently 30 is that banks would be required by the
authorities to issue hybrid-debt-capital instruments that could be converted when needed into
loss-absorbing equity. In one variant, the option to require conversion would lie in the hands
of regulators provided a systemic-severity test were passed.
Summary and conclusions
During the current crisis, the normal functioning of the financial system broke down, with
profound effects on credit conditions and on the appropriate monetary policy response.
Although I have ranged widely today, I have in fact deliberately not covered the operations
employed in some countries to lend directly to firms, effectively by-passing the financial
system; or the actions by some central banks, including the Bank of England, to expand the
money supply in an environment of near-zero policy rates. Instead, I have focused on the
repertoire of instruments directed to supporting, and ideally reviving, the financial system
itself: funding liquidity, market liquidity, and solvency.
In terms of funding liquidity, following innovations over the past year the Bank of England
now offers six permanent facilities through which liquidity can pass between us and the
banking system – intra-day repos to oil the wholesale payments system; variations in banks’
reserves balances, which comprise a prime liquid asset for banks; Open Market Operation
(OMOs) against government securities; use of overnight Operational Standing Facilities to
absorb day-to-day frictional payments shocks; longer-term repos through which the Bank

30

14

For example, “An Expedited Resolution Mechanism for Distressed Financial Firms: Regulatory Hybrid
Securities”, Squam Lake Working Group on Financial Regulation, April 2009, Council on Foreign Relations.

BIS Review 67/2009

lends cash against wider collateral; and a Discount Window Facility, through which banks
without fundamental problems of solvency or viability can exchange a very wide range of
collateral for UK government bonds.
In designing those facilities the Bank has been clear about its goals. On the financial stability
front, we frame them as follows:
“To reduce the cost of disruptions to the liquidity and payments services supplied by
commercial banks. The Bank does this by balancing the provision of liquidity insurance
against the costs of creating incentives for banks to take greater risks, and subject to the
need to avoid taking risk onto its balance sheet.”
In that area, central banks are able to draw on more than a century of experience and
analysis. But this crisis has exposed a gap in thinking about what principles should guide any
Market Maker of Last Resort or Capital of Last Resort interventions by the authorities. I will
not remotely have solved that problem today, but I hope I can prompt others to help clarify
thinking and practice in those areas in the years to come. Doing so will be important to
developing new “rules of the game” for what must in the future be a more resilient global
financial system.

BIS Review 67/2009

15

Paul Tucker: The state of the markets – four issues
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor, Financial Stability, of the Bank of England, at
the Association of British Insurers 2009 Biennial Conference, London, 9 June 2009.
*

*

*

Many thanks for the invitation to be here today. The Bank greatly values its relationship with
the insurance industry. We are just immensely grateful for the intelligence you provide, as
asset managers and insurers; and for our constructive dialogue on policy issues.
I have a few brief remarks on four broadly linked issues.
The macroeconomic outlook and bank lending
Since the beginning of the year I have felt that it will take until late autumn at least to have
any kind of a handle on broadly what type of outlook we face. My view on that hasn’t really
changed. Of course, over recent weeks near-term indicators, notably the business surveys,
have improved a bit. Confidence seems to have stabilised. And that has been most obvious
in the financial markets, where the really good news is that firms on both sides of the Atlantic
have been raising funds in the equity and bond markets.
But a sense of perspective is needed if those apparently small steps forward are not to be
frittered away. Inevitably the medium-term outlook remains highly uncertain, and the path
back to anything like normality can only be gradual I’m afraid.
In particular, for the moment it is unclear – as, I must say, it is bound to be at this stage –
whether the financial system can generate the expansion of credit that will most likely be
necessary to support recovery. The reopening of high-grade bond markets has definitely
been encouraging. But in most countries, including the UK, bank lending remains subdued. It
is hard to disentangle how much of that is down to weak demand, and how much to tighter
supply conditions from the banks. I would just say this. I truly believe that it is in the interests
of the banks themselves to ensure that businesses get the working-capital finance they need.
While one can imagine, I suppose, individual banks being tempted to sit it out in order to
deleverage their balance sheets in an environment that is obviously tougher for them, there
cannot sensibly be free riders. If all banks were to adopt such a strategy, recovery might end
up being anaemic at best, which would feed back into the banking system itself – increasing
defaults and depleting banks’ capital. Not lending would be a counterproductive business
and financial strategy. I’m reasonably confident that senior bankers can be persuaded to see
that themselves, if indeed they don’t already.
But it will, in my view, take until the autumn at least to gauge whether tolerable progress is
being made on this front. Without it, confidence could ebb away. But with it, recovery will
have a fair chance of becoming rooted.
Risks will, I should be clear, persist from the international environment and, in particular, the
pattern of international saving. If the Asian economies were to continue to save at an
extraordinary rate but the Western economies increase their saving, as over time we must in
order to repair national and sectoral balance sheets, longer-term risk-free rates could again
fall in order to bring about the counterpart expansion in investment. And, although it may
seem far-fetched right now, that could give an upward impetus to asset prices over the
medium-term. We would need to be careful not to mistake any such future developments for
a miracle improvement in underlying economic and financial conditions. Indeed,
internationally, we need to learn lessons about brewing risks from medium-term imbalances.

BIS Review 71/2009

1

The Bank’s policy response, and credit markets
Alongside the Government’s actions to underpin the capital resources and funding of the
banking system, the Bank’s policy actions have been designed to assist recovery in credit
flows and nominal demand.
The big downside risks to the outlook have warranted a substantial monetary stimulus, which
the MPC has provided by bringing Bank Rate down to nearly zero, and by injecting a
substantial amount of money directly into the economy. Speaking of course only for myself, I
have so far preferred that approach to one where we would instead commit to keep Bank
Rate low for a specified extended period. It would be hard to avoid the country
misunderstanding that any such commitment was conditional on the outlook; in other words
that our plans could and would change as the outlook changed. And the current strategy has
been consistent with a mildly upward-sloping money-market curve, which signals that the
market is confident – as it should be – that the MPC will retighten monetary conditions when
in due course that is warranted by the medium-term outlook for inflation. Our 2% target is a
valuable anchor in shaping and implementing our strategy.
In this, insurance companies are by no means on the sidelines. By focusing our purchases
on medium and long-maturity gilts, we are aiming in part to shift the composition of the
portfolios of long-term investment institutions. And it was encouraging, therefore, that the
money holdings of non-bank financial institutions expanded recently. Some economists
argue that gilts and central bank money are near perfect substitutes, so that the effect of our
Quantitative Easing will be negligible. They may well be close substitutes for traders. But I
doubt they are perfect substitutes for insurance companies and pension funds, many of
which probably don’t participate in the secured deposit “repo” markets for switching gilts into
cash; and which in any case desire assets with a longer “interest-rate duration” than money.
If so, holding zero-yielding money balances will not suit them, and we could reasonably hope
for increased demand for, perhaps, corporate bonds and other financial assets. Risk premia
might decline slightly. And the flow of credit outside the banking system may improve,
helping to support a recovery in nominal demand. Over the next quarter or so, amongst other
indicators I will therefore be looking at what happens to firm and household money holdings,
as well as credit flows and risk premia.
The Bank’s Asset Purchase Facility schemes for corporate paper are designed to help
catalyse that process. The fact that the Bank is buying relatively small amounts of paper may
have been misunderstood by some. As the central bank, we are not operating the schemes
in order to lend in scale to the real economy, but rather to help revive the markets. Some
have described this variant of liquidity insurance as acting as “Market Maker of Last Resort”,
and I recently aired some thoughts on the kind of principles that might guide central banks in
this area. 1 They include consistency with monetary policy; avoiding undue risk to the central
bank; acting as a catalyst; and avoiding attempts to prop up markets that would not be
fundamentally viable once peacetime resumes.
Yesterday, the Bank issued for consultation some ideas on how we might be able to extend
our liquidity insurance, through the APF, to facilities for working capital finance. They cover a
possible facility for secured commercial paper, where the underlying assets would be
portfolios of SME trade-finance credit, and a facility for supply chain finance. I would hope
that the insurance industry, and the liquidity and investment funds you run, might be
investors in such paper, whose liquidity would receive some underpinning. Certainly you will

1

2

For example, see Buiter W (2009), “Central banks and financial crises”, paper presented at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s symposium at Jackson Hole, Wyoming and Tucker (2009), “The repertoire of
official sector interventions in the financial system: Last resort lending, market-making and capital” paper
presented at the 2009 International Conference: Financial System and Monetary Policy Implementation, Bank
of Japan.

BIS Review 71/2009

be an important part of the Bank’s consultative process led by my colleagues Paul Fisher
and Sarah Breeden.
Addressing trade and working capital finance has become all the more important given the
reduction in the availability of trade-credit insurance, which our regional Agents hear quite a
lot about. We therefore welcomed the initiative of that relatively concentrated industry to
release a code of conduct, supported by the ABI, for handling difficult cases where
unnecessary firm distress could be avoided. The Bank has followed this carefully given our
role as midwife for the London Approach designed to help facilitate the orderly resolution of
creditor/debtor problems. In a few cases over recent months, as well as over the trade-creditinsurance code, my colleague Andrew Bailey has played a behind-the-scenes role – the
traditional role of providing the Bank’s good offices where (and only where) we can help, and
where help is desired by those involved. Effective resolution mechanisms are an important
back-stop when the system’s resilience proves wanting, as recently.
Developing more resilient capital markets
Over the medium term, we of course need a much more resilient financial system. This is not
just a matter of a better structured, better capitalised, more liquid, more prudently riskmanaged, more transparent, and better regulated banking system (and I emphasise system).
We also need more resilient capital markets. In the 1980s and into the 1990s the authorities
here and elsewhere helped to bring about a number of important structural changes in the
market infrastructure: LIFFE; reforms at LCH; book-entry transfer, and later delivery-versuspayment, settlement systems; a wholesale payment system designed to withstand bank
failures; the introduction of the gilt repo market. A lot of plumbing! And proof from the past
that, working together, the industry and the authorities can do good. Those initiatives were
designed to underpin stability in the rapidly evolving capital markets of the day. The current
crisis has reminded everyone of the need for the authorities, occasionally and in a welltargeted way, to help remove blockages or quietly steer private sector initiatives on to a
course serving the wider public interest. Entrepreneurial innovation is the life blood of
economic growth. But sometimes it outstrips the supporting infrastructure. That happened
with some parts of our capital markets over the past decade or more. The recent initiatives
coming out of the US Treasury to strengthen markets are therefore to be welcomed in their
broad thrust and goals.
In particular, the Bank of England agrees that more of the vanilla OTC markets should be
cleared via central counterparty clearing houses. LCH led the way globally in opening up
central counterparty services to interest-rate swaps, breaking a mis-think that somehow
CCPs could clear only exchanged-traded instruments. And recently it has made the welcome
announcement that non-dealers will be able to access such central clearing, at least
indirectly via “clearing members”, as for exchange-traded contracts. Central clearing can help
to provide transparency and consistency in valuations and haircuts. It can help to promote
greater standardisation in terms. It makes haircuts more visible to the market as a whole, and
to the authorities, who as overseers of the system should be prepared to form a view when
haircuts are too low – and the associated market leverage is too high – for system stability to
be assured. The role of the authorities is important. It is absolutely vital that management
maintain the integrity and soundness of the key clearing houses as they expand their range. 2
As overseers of the payments systems embedded in clearing houses, the Bank will work with
the FSA and our international counterparts on this.
It is often said that dealers resist such initiatives, as it can squeeze their margins. That may
well be the perspective at desk level, but I suspect it is unfair to many CEOs, who have a

2

As the failure of Hong Kong’s futures clearing house demonstrated in 1987, very bad things happen if a
central counterparty fails. Many lessons were drawn.

BIS Review 71/2009

3

clear interest in the health, safety and soundness of the system. And if some didn’t recognise
it before, they will now – as their predecessors did in the relatively recent past.
The key industry associations can also play a constructive role in this whole area – as,
indeed, they have in the past. This crisis would have been even worse if ISDA and others
had not overseen the introduction of the collateralisation of derivatives-related counterparty
credit exposures amongst the dealer community. But there are lessons about extending
collateralisation, and standardising terms in vanilla instruments, beyond the dealer
community in some circumstances.
The debate is not just about clearing houses and post-trade infrastructure. The financial
community must also be open to more trading in core, vanilla markets going via exchanges
or other well-designed and open trading platforms. If well constructed, that could help to
preserve liquidity when times are tough. We would, for example, like to see serious
consideration of whether the corporate bond markets could benefit through something along
those lines.
Bank capital instruments
The insurance industry is involved, one way or another, in everything I have touched on this
morning. But there is one other area – as investors in bank capital instruments. I am
therefore sure you understand that the authorities, internationally, cannot avoid reviewing
what should count in the medium term as regulatory capital for banks. It won’t do for banks to
be able to leverage up on subordinated debt (or other forms of hybrid capital) if, just when it
matters, the holders do not suffer because the authorities cannot let the banks concerned be
liquidated without bringing system collapse down on us all. We either need a system where
banks of any type can quietly fail and hybrid capital is actually useful in protecting the deposit
insurer; or, more realistically, we shall need a much narrower definition of capital. Only equity
can absorb losses and sustain a going concern. Finding a way through that in the current
crisis remains a challenge. One helpful step might be for the investment industry to seek out
opportunities to convert subordinated debt into equity; or, at a discount, into senior
unsecured debt, as has occurred in a few instances already. It would probably entail a
haircut, but I wouldn’t air it unless I thought it could be in your collective and medium-term
interests as investors in our economy and the system of credit that supports and lubricates it.
The new Special Resolution Regime for banks may create healthy incentives in that broad
direction.
In concluding, can I thank you again for inviting me to join you today. Authorities everywhere
are having to innovate to help get us through this crisis. And we will need to innovate to build
a better system for tomorrow. Our dialogue with you can only help that. We are very grateful
for it.

4

BIS Review 71/2009

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet
for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House, London, 17 June
2009.
*

*

*

My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Ministers, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, Ladies
and Gentlemen,
It has been quite a year. A year to remember, but not to repeat. Since we last met, a financial
panic swept through markets in September, several major financial institutions failed, and a
remarkable collapse of confidence around the world led to unprecedented declines in
industrial production and national output. World trade fell by almost 15% in six months, a
faster rate of decline than in the Great Depression.
Faced with this crisis, the Bank of England took extraordinary actions. Bank Rate was cut
virtually to zero, and the Monetary Policy Committee embarked on a programme of £125
billion of asset purchases. And in your own businesses you too have had to deal with what
some have called a once-in-a-century event.
Since the panic last autumn, overall output has fallen by around 3% in the United States and
the United Kingdom, 6% in Germany, and 7% in Japan. The collapse of spending in these
economies is having painful consequences. In less than a year, over 5 million jobs have
been lost in the United States, almost 2 million in the euro area, and almost half a million
here in the United Kingdom.
Despite those unprecedented falls in activity, there are some signs that the British economy
is beginning to stabilise, and financial markets have improved markedly. There are three
solid reasons for thinking that a recovery in activity was likely to occur at some point this
year.
The first I call the “Honda effect” – many firms, as Honda did last year at its plant in Swindon,
cut back production and met demand from stock, resuming production this year once
inventories had been reduced.
The second factor is the level of sterling which, despite its recent rally, is still some 20%
lower than in the summer of 2007. That will encourage a switch in spending, at home and
abroad, towards goods and services produced in the UK.
Finally, and perhaps most important, is the enormous policy stimulus that has been injected
into the economy. Bank Rate was cut by four percentage points in four months. But the
Monetary Policy Committee judged that even that was insufficient to prevent inflation falling
below our 2% target, and so it embarked on a programme of asset purchases designed to
increase the money supply and improve conditions in non-bank corporate credit markets.
The programme will shortly be extended to working capital finance, which should be of
particular help to smaller companies. But the Bank must not become the arbiter of the
allocation of public credit to individual companies or sectors – such decisions are rightly and
necessarily the province of government. So there is a limit to the scope of the Bank’s
activities in this area.
The success of the policy is not to be judged by the increase in bank lending. Its aim is to
increase the money supply. There are already tentative signs that the programme is
beginning to have beneficial effects with the growth rate of broad money picking up.
So there are certainly grounds for believing that the rapid falls in activity are coming to an
end. But there are some equally solid reasons for believing that the path to full recovery
could be protracted. The most obvious is that the supply of bank lending to companies and

BIS Review 76/2009

1

households remains constrained. The stock of bank lending to non-financial companies has
been falling in recent months, and household lending has been flat. Part of this undoubtedly
reflects weak demand in the face of the recession. But the evidence from prospective
borrowers, and the terms on which lenders are willing to extend credit, suggest that banks’
ability to finance a sustained recovery remains impaired by low levels of equity capital. Stress
tests designed to assess the viability of banks are very different from tests of the capacity of
the banking system to finance a recovery.
Investors continue to demand high returns to finance banks. Put bluntly, market data on
credit spreads imply that some banks are viewed as a worse credit risk than some of their
customers. As a result, companies that can bypass the banks to access capital markets
directly are doing so. Indeed, in the first four months of this year, more finance was raised in
debt and equity markets than is normally the case in an entire year. Most companies,
however, especially smaller and medium-sized enterprises, rely heavily on bank finance. And
with current market sentiment it may take further additions to equity capital before the
banking system will be able to supply credit at a price and on a scale to finance a sustained
recovery. That is likely to take time.
It is too soon to reverse the extraordinary policy stimulus that has been injected into the UK
economy through monetary policy, the provision of liquidity support to banks, guarantees of
bank funding, and fiscal policy. Nevertheless, it is not too early to prepare such “exit
strategies” and to explain how they would work.
The challenge facing the Monetary Policy Committee is straightforward in principle but
difficult in practice. As activity returns to more normal levels, the outlook for inflation will pick
up. And it is the outlook for inflation that will guide decisions on the pace and timing of a
withdrawal of monetary stimulus. Reaching judgements on the outlook for inflation is never
easy, and assessing their implications for policy will always be a matter of balancing risks. In
contrast, the choice of instruments is simple. When appropriate the MPC will raise Bank Rate
and gradually run down its portfolio of assets in a manner consistent with maintaining orderly
markets.
Just as no one should plan on the present degree of monetary stimulus persisting
indefinitely, so too no bank should expect that the current extraordinary liquidity support will
continue for ever. In due course, a strategy will be needed to exit from that temporary
support, and from the extensive bank guarantees, to the permanent regime for liquidity
insurance that the Bank announced last year. The Bank of England will talk with the banks
about how to manage the transition.
As we emerge from recession, fiscal policy too will have to change. In taking the
extraordinary measures to stabilise banks and the wider economy, some of the past build-up
of debt has been transferred from the private to the public sector. And it was right to use a
temporary fiscal stimulus to counter the depth of the downturn experienced last year. But five
years from now national debt, as a proportion of national income, is expected to be more
than double its level before the crisis. So it is also necessary to produce a clear plan to show
how prospective deficits will be reduced during the next Parliament, so returning to a
gradually declining path for the ratio of national debt to national income.
We must learn lessons from the events of the past two years. They cannot be final
conclusions because the present crisis has some way to run. But two stand out. First, price
stability does not guarantee stability of the economy as a whole. Second, the instruments
used to pursue financial stability are in need of sharpening and refining.
Setting Bank Rate to maintain price stability was successful in itself, but did not prevent a
recession induced by a financial crisis. But let’s not throw out the baby with the bathwater.
The period prior to the crisis was the most stable economic environment for generations.
And, unlike most previous recessions, this crisis wasn’t preceded by an unsustainable boom
in output. In the five years leading up to the crisis, overall GDP growth remained close to its
long-run average and inflation differed from the 2% target on average by only 0.2 percentage

2

BIS Review 76/2009

points. Diverting monetary policy from its goal of price stability risks making the economy
less stable and the financial system no more so. To argue that monetary policy should be
directed to counter inadequately priced risk is to argue that unemployment is a price worth
paying to tame the banking system.
Inflation targeting is a necessary but not sufficient condition for stability in the economy as a
whole. When a policy is necessary but not sufficient, the answer is not to abandon, but to
augment, it. Indeed, the overarching lesson from this crisis is that the authorities lacked
sufficient policy instruments to take effective actions. Nowhere was this more evident than in
dealing with Northern Rock in the absence of proper resolution powers. For domestic
institutions that particular issue was settled by the Banking Act 2009, and the new resolution
powers were successfully deployed by the Bank to deal with the Dunfermline Building
Society in March.
What other powers are required? There is a broad consensus that our traditional policy
instruments need to be augmented by a “macro-prudential” toolkit. But what are such
“macro-prudential” instruments for? Are they to increase the resilience of individual banks, or
are they to protect the economy from the banks? The former implies a sensible extension of
the current regime of capital requirements for individual institutions. The latter goes to the
heart of the problems caused by the financial sector as a whole for the rest of the economy.
We need to reflect more deeply on the nature of the failures before designing a regulatory
response – after all many financial markets continued to function well. But banks entered the
crisis with historically low levels of liquid assets, and inadequate levels of capital with which
to absorb losses. Moreover, in the United Kingdom, the financial sector became too big and
too highly leveraged. First, the size of our banking system was, as a proportion of GDP, five
times that in the United States, and the risks to the UK taxpayer correspondingly greater.
Second, the process of reducing very high leverage is doing great damage to the rest of the
economy. And the required adjustment still has a long way to run – few of the largest banks
in the United Kingdom managed to reduce their leverage ratios through 2008, which remain
at historically high levels. Third, interconnections between institutions create potential
fragilities across the system, as we saw last September. Fourth, the risks associated with
large-scale proprietary trading are probably harder to control in limited liability companies. So
we need instruments to prevent the size, leverage, fragility and risk of the financial system
from becoming too great. The resulting “macro-prudential” toolkit will contain a number of
instruments to reduce risk, both across the system and over time. It must not be put together
in a hurry. And I share the concerns of many of you that we are a long way from identifying
precise regulatory interventions that would improve the functioning of markets.
As far as individual banks are concerned, we face some uncomfortable choices about the
structure and regulation of our banking sector. If some banks are thought to be too big to fail,
then, in the words of a distinguished American economist, they are too big. It is not sensible
to allow large banks to combine high street retail banking with risky investment banking or
funding strategies, and then provide an implicit state guarantee against failure. Something
must give. Either those guarantees to retail depositors should be limited to banks that make
a narrower range of investments, or banks which pose greater risks to taxpayers and the
economy in the event of failure should face higher capital requirements, or we must develop
resolution powers such that large and complex financial institutions can be wound down in an
orderly manner. Or, perhaps, an element of all three. Privately owned and managed
institutions that are too big to fail sit oddly with a market economy.
One important practical step would be to require any regulated bank itself to produce a plan
for an orderly wind down of its activities. That would provide the information to the authorities
the absence of which made past decisions about the future of institutions difficult. Making a
will should be as much a part of good housekeeping for banks as it is for the rest of us. And it
would be sensible for the various authorities to work across national boundaries to identify
detailed plans for how each large cross-border financial institution could be wound down.

BIS Review 76/2009

3

The Bank of England has a new statutory responsibility for financial stability. Bank Rate is
the instrument we deploy to achieve monetary stability, and should be used exclusively for
that purpose. To achieve financial stability the powers of the Bank are limited to those of
voice and the new resolution powers. The Bank finds itself in a position rather like that of a
church whose congregation attends weddings and burials but ignores the sermons in
between. Like the church, we cannot promise that bad things won’t happen to our flock – the
prevention of all financial crises is in neither our nor anyone else’s power, as a study of
history or human nature would reveal. And experience suggests that attempts to encourage
a better life through the power of voice is not enough. Warnings are unlikely to be effective
when people are being asked to change behaviour which seems to them highly profitable. So
it is not entirely clear how the Bank will be able to discharge its new statutory responsibility if
we can do no more than issue sermons or organise burials.
Whatever the ultimate shape of the structure and regulation of the banking system – and, as
many of you have said, we need to think carefully to get this right – change will be
necessary. The costs of this crisis are not to be measured simply in terms of its impact on
public finances, the destruction of wealth, and the number of jobs lost. They are also to be
seen in the lost trust in the financial sector among other parts of our economy. For a
generation or more, businesses and families up and down the country were told, not least by
the City, that the disciplines of the market economy were essential, even if painful in the
short run, for greater prosperity in the longer term. That belief in the merits of a market
economy was embraced and for many years was not misplaced. But out of the blue – in this
case the financial sector – came a crisis that did not stem from weaknesses in the real
economy. It has wreaked havoc on those same businesses and families. Unemployment, as
we saw in today’s figures, is rising sharply. And yet it is the banking system that has received
financial support on an almost unimaginable scale. We who work in the financial sector have
much to do to regain the trust of those who work outside it. “My word is my bond” are old
words, but they were important. “My word is my CDO-squared” will never catch on.
There is no support in this country, and no case, for excessively bureaucratic regulation. But
change to the structure, regulation and indeed culture of our banking system is necessary.
Blaming individuals is no substitute for acknowledging the failure of a system, of a certain
type of banking. We have a real opportunity now to put that right, and regain the trust that
has been lost.
Lord Mayor, as we prepare to toast the Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, we
remember that the City is more than banking and that banking is much more than the trading
of complex securities. So all of us here tonight would like to pay tribute to your work since
you became Lord Mayor, to support your efforts to promote financial literacy, and to thank
both the Lady Mayoress and yourself for the splendid hospitality which you have extended to
us all this evening.
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to
"The Lord Mayor and the Lady Mayoress", Ian and Lin Luder.

4

BIS Review 76/2009

Paul Tucker: Regimes for handling bank failures – redrawing the banking
Social Contract
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the British
Bankers’ Association Annual International Banking Conference “Restoring confidence –
moving forward”, London, 30 June 2009.
*

*

*

Thank you very much to the BBA for inviting me today. It is a real pleasure to be here when
so much is being debated about the future of the financial system. I’d like to use the occasion
to develop some of the emerging thoughts of the international official sector on the
environment – the “rules of the game” or Social Contract – within which banks will need to
operate in future.
Banks’ liquidity risks and the banking Social Contract
The defining characteristic of banks lies in the liquidity services you provide to the economy,
and in the consequent liquidity risks that you run. History shows that banks are inherently
fragile. Banks are vulnerable to deposit runs. The current crisis has revealed, if it needed to
be, that the same goes for money market funds. And it turned out that big securities dealers
had effectively been turned into quasi banks by funding themselves partly from balances held
by prime-brokerage hedge-fund clients; balances that could be withdrawn on demand, and in
some cases were. So what I have to say is about the economic substance of banking
liquidity risk, not its legal form.
While banks have also suffered capital shortfalls as this crisis progressed, at least in its early
stages liquidity was at its core. As our capital markets and the trading activities of our banks
expanded, the risk-management paradigm was that the liquidity of markets would be
resilient. It is surprising that some big banks, not all, ran such truly massive maturity
mismatches. And it is similarly surprising that many medium-sized banks in this country had
liquidity portfolios comprising largely floating rate notes issued by other banks. Yes, it does of
course cost more to hold gilts and other highly liquid assets; but an illusory liquidity portfolio
just transfers the risk to the central bank or the government.
Some banks and building societies have not looked distress in the eye over the past year
and in earlier years endeavoured to run their business safely, foregoing some of the profits of
the boom. But I would urge even them to recognise that their relatively calm passage through
the crisis to date owes a lot to government standing behind their peers.
The banking Social Contract
That support cannot go on forever, which underlines why the Social Contract for banks must
be redrawn.
It must be redrawn to reflect the lessons from the crisis. And also to mark a credible shift in
regime so that, as an industry, you can re-establish trust and stand on your own feet.
Traditionally, there have been three elements to the Social Contract for banking. In exchange
for being allowed to profit from taking the risks inherent in providing liquidity, or monetary and
credit, services to the economy, banks have been subject to prudential regulation; given
access to liquidity insurance at the central bank; and required to finance industry-wide
insurance schemes to protect depositors. All three components have needed to be
redesigned.
I offered a few thoughts on the first – the regulation of banks – at the conference on the
FSA’s Turner Report a few weeks ago. On microprudential supervision. I wanted to add four

BIS Review 83/2009

1

points. First, that supervisors must be expert, unafraid to substitute their judgment for that of
management and the board where necessary, but restrain themselves from doing so except
when needed. Second, that concentrated exposures, on either side of the balance sheet,
must be limited. Third, that complex structures rendering a bank unsupervisable must not be
permitted, as the BCCI crisis taught us nearly twenty years ago. And fourth, that regulatory
requirements for capital, liquidity and so on should take into account how much risk a bank
brings to the system as a whole. As one of my predecessors, George Blunden said over
twenty years ago, “Supervisory standards are set with an eye to protecting [banks] from
problems which could be created by wider, systemic developments. A bank may consider a
course of action it wishes to take to be acceptable – as it may well be in a limited context. But
the same course might, if widely copied by other banks, have unfortunate effects on the
banking system as a whole. It is part of the supervisors’ job to take that wider, systemic view
and sometimes to curb practices which even prudent banks might, if left to themselves,
regard as safe.” 1 All four points are old verities.
On the second plank of the banking Social Contract, I set out the Bank’s current thinking on
liquidity insurance in Tokyo a few weeks ago. 2 The Bank has introduced new permanent
liquidity facilities for banks, whereby we stand ready to lend to viable banks against a very
wide range of collateral, on terms designed to avoid encouraging imprudent liquidity
management. And this year we have effectively been acting as a Market Maker of Last
Resort in certain corporate-credit markets. Given the significance of capital markets in
today’s financial system, central banks need to think about whether or not such operations
should be a permanent part of their armoury.
Today, I want to outline our thinking on the third element of the Social Contract. Taking it to
be about only deposit insurance turns out to be too narrow. It is really about what society
should demand of banks to make their failures marginally more tolerable.
It is not often a central banker can speak openly about bank failures. Indeed, most of the
time, central bankers avoid public remarks on issues like Too Big To Fail; Emergency
Liquidity Assistance; flaws in insolvency regimes; burden sharing between national
authorities, and so on. But surrounded as we are by failed banks, it is not only possible to
talk about bank failures without scaring the horses; it would be irresponsible not to do so.
And as central bankers and regulators free themselves from that mental strait-jacket, new
and perhaps far reaching ideas are emerging.
They amount to redrawing the third element of the Social Contract between the authorities
and the banks.
To recap, the third element has been that the banking system should bear the cost of
insuring retail depositors with banks against loss. The lessons go, narrowly, to the
construction of such insurance; but also to a broader reformulation in which deposit
insurance is just one component of the overall package.
Deposit insurance: risk-based premia and pre-funding
For most of the past thirty years, deposit insurance in the UK applied to modest amounts,
and provided less than 100% cover of the insured amount. The element of “co-insurance”
was intended to leave retail depositors with an incentive to take care where they deposited

1

Blunden G, “Supervision and Central Banking”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, August 1987. Since the
Turner Report was published, Adair Turner has himself added this point to the FSA’s list of conclusions.

2

“The Repertoire of Official Sector Inventions in the Financial System: Last Resort Lending, Market-Making,
and Capital”, speech by Paul Tucker given at the Bank of Japan’s 2009 International Conference in Tokyo on
28 May 2009. Also see, “The Development of the Bank of England’s Market Operations”, a consultative paper
by the Bank of England, October 2008.

2

BIS Review 83/2009

their savings. It turned out to be naïve on two fronts. First, it proved unrealistic to expect
households generally to take such care. And second, it brought politics into bank rescues,
because of the hardship that could still be suffered by regular depositors when their bank
failed. Nearly a decade ago I became convinced of the need for 100% insurance of a
meaningful amount in order, as I put it in internal exchanges, “to take politics out of crisis
management”.
In the wake of Northern Rock and Bradford and Bingley, the FSA moved to 100% insurance
of £50K. That means that nearly all regular households in this country are completely
protected; and when today I refer, rather approximately, to “100% insurance”, that is what I
mean. 3
The Bank’s view has been that in such a system, the banking system’s contribution to the
insurance scheme should be risk-based and pre-funded. The industry has been more
doubtful about the idea of pre-funding and so I want to explain our thinking.
A system of 100% insurance of a meaningful amount changes the landscape.
First, it alters the purposes of bank regulation. It is no longer really about protecting
depositors, as the vast majority are wholly protected by the insurance scheme. From a micro
perspective, it is essentially about minimising risks to, and losses at, the deposit insurer, the
UK Financial Services Compensation Scheme.
Second, it also potentially alters the dynamics of the market place. It makes it easier for
banks to pay up for deposits; the signal that a bank will take greater risk than otherwise, as it
would have to, does not matter to the depositors. They are covered, and so simply enjoy the
higher returns on their deposits. If the bank succeeds, the rewards are reaped by
shareholders and management; if it fails, retail creditors get repaid in full. This doesn’t feel
like a stable regime. And it is worth remembering that President Roosevelt seriously
hesitated before introducing the equivalent FDIC scheme in the US in the 1930s for precisely
that reason.
One way of addressing these risks – and the approach eventually being tried in the US –
would be to make such risk-taking banks pay a higher levy into the insurance scheme. Riskbased premia would help to offset the incentives otherwise created. And, of course, any such
insurance scheme must be pre-funded; it is no good trying to collect levies from riskier banks
after they have gone bust. That is why the Bank has advocated this course.
Another route would be to seek to address banks’ perverse incentives via idiosyncratic, riskbased capital requirements; ie active use of Pillar II of the Capital Accord, which is desirable
in any case.
One can argue that the two routes could be equivalent for the banking system as a whole. In
a system of risk-based premia, the ex ante levies on “safe and sound” banks would obviously
be lower than those on their riskier peers. In a system of variable capital requirements, the
burden on the FSCS and so the ex post levies on the surviving “safe and sound” banks
should crystallise less frequently, and perhaps also be smaller, the greater the amount of
capital a riskier, failed bank had to carry. But it is not so straightforward. Unlike the US, the
UK does not have a regime of “depositor preference”, which means that the FSCS ranks
alongside (rather than ahead of) ordinary wholesale creditors and so shares losses with
them. The risk-reducing benefits of extra risk-based capital would, therefore, be spread over

3

The FSA Consultation Paper, “Financial Services Compensation Scheme: Review of limits” (CP08/15),
estimated that (based on BBA data for two large banks) the share of accounts covered by the increase in
deposit insurance from £35,000 to £50,000 would rise from 96% to 98%, while the share of the overall value of
deposits insured would rise from 52% to 60%. Using data from the building society sector, the coverage of
individuals was similar to those with accounts at a bank, but the share of total balances insured was
somewhat greater, at around 77%.

BIS Review 83/2009

3

creditors generally, not just insured depositors and the FSCS. Risk-based premia protect the
FSCS, and so the wider banking system, in a more targeted way. The two approaches could
probably be made equivalent by making Pillar II/risk-based capital add-ons sensitive to the
total scale of a bank’s unsecured funding – wholesale as well as retail. For this purpose, the
maturity of the unsecured wholesale funding is irrelevant, so this would not be the same thing
as saying that capital requirements should take into account a bank’s wholesale liquidity risk,
and might take us beyond anything being contemplated by regulators at present.
Even without risk-based premia, pre-funding ensures that failed banks do make a
contribution. And it has other advantages. First, it avoids the potentially pro-cyclical effects of
collecting contributions on a pay-as-you-go basis, ie just when the banking system is weak,
Pre-funding may be a useful step in reducing the financial system’s pro-cyclical tendencies.
Second, subject to appropriate constraints, the insurance fund could be available for use in
resolutions that avoid liquidation and payout under the deposit-insurance scheme. That is the
approach in the US. And it brings me to the broader elaboration of the banking Social
Contract.
Resolving bank distress: information needs
As the 2007 Northern Rock disaster demonstrated and as the Governor explained at the
Treasury Select Committee in September of that year, each country needs a Special
Resolution Regime for banks, enabling economically essential banking functions and so
confidence to be preserved in the event of distress. The UK now has such a regime.
But delivering effective resolutions is not just a matter of the official sector introducing
legislation and equipping an authority, in the UK’s case the Bank, with resources to use it.
It also, crucially, requires banks to structure themselves so as to permit orderly resolution.
That, it can now been seen, is the better version of the third element of the banking Social
Contract.
What does it mean?
In the first place, it entails banks maintaining up-to-date information on their retail deposits in
a way that facilitates rapid payout under the FSCS. Rapid payout is necessary to maintain
the confidence of depositors in other banks. It’s all very well most retail depositors being
100% protected, but not so comforting if they had to wait ages to receive repayment from the
deposit insurer after their bank had failed. In the UK, the FSCS will be working hard to
address this issue. 4 Until rapid payout is feasible, where a buyer for the whole bank for some
other solution cannot be found it is more likely than otherwise that distressed banks will be
resolved via the SRR, with deposit books transferred where possible to other banks.
But I stress “where possible”, because this general approach depends on there being bidders
for deposit books. That cannot be guaranteed. So banks must invest in the information
systems to be able to provide the FSCS pretty well instantly with what they need for rapid
payout. EU directives specify a target for payout within 20 days. Something like a week
would probably be more reassuring. Speeding up the process will require banks to keep
information on, for example, all the deposits a person has with a banking group which are

4

4

This has been the subject of two recent FSA consultation papers: “Financial Services Compensation Scheme
reform: Fast payout for depositors and raising consumer awareness”, (CP 09/3), January 2009 and “Financial
Services Compensation Scheme: Verification of the single customer view and changes to deposit
compensation”, (CP 09/16), June 2009. The latter expands on the some of the proposals in the earlier CP, as
well as providing feedback from that consultation. It notes that: “Final rules have not yet been made regarding
fast payout generally and no decision has been made as to whether to proceed with the single customer view
(SCV) proposals”. The CP remains open for comment.

BIS Review 83/2009

eligible for deposit insurance; and the closing balance, including interest due, each day on
eligible deposits. Banks would also need to be able to transmit all that information, on
demand, to the FSCS. Getting to that point will require time. There is a case for debating
whether it should be a regulatory requirement.
The information I outlined is not needed just when a bank does actually go into liquidation
and the FSCS makes a payout to depositors. It is also needed by the Bank of England to
assess whether any of the Special Resolution Regime (SRR) tools could meet the statutory
objectives of the 2009 Act more effectively than liquidation. Indeed, that is why the Bank has
a clear interest in the information provided to the FSCS.
In fact, even more information is needed when we employ the SRR instead of liquidation.
Using the new Act, the Bank, working the FSA and HMT, can split up a bank or building
society into a number of pieces: deposits going to one buyer; some assets possibly to
another; parts going into administration. Effective execution of an operation of this kind is
very information intensive. For example, it requires banks to have up-to-date, coherent
management accounts for all parts of the business. One might think that would be a good
idea anyway. It should certainly be a requirement now.
Execution also requires detailed information on how the business is run. Just a few
examples. First, on the services that different parts of the group provide to each other,
because if split up they may have to agree so-called Transitional Service Agreements.
Second, on which essential services have been outsourced. Third, on details of netting and
derivative contracts, so that the Bank can apply various statutory safeguards for creditors.
That is a formidable task, and it is striking that, in the US, the FDIC has introduced a
requirement that troubled banks must be able to demonstrate that, if necessary, they could
report each day the details of so-called Qualifying Financial Contracts, which are essentially
derivatives. We may need to contemplate something along those lines in the UK.
All of that is needed after buyers for the business have been found. Potential bidders for all
or part of an ailing bank will themselves need the kinds of information typically offered to
bidders in a “friendly” M&A transaction. So there is a case for banks routinely maintaining
such a Data Room as part of their crisis contingency plans. In delivering its resolution
responsibilities under the 2009 Banking Act, the Bank is ready to work with banks and the
FSA in helping to specify in more detail what is needed in practice. If the information can be
ready almost routinely the execution of resolutions would be aided.
In summary, as a consequence of its new statutory role, the Bank can have a need for a lot
of information about banks getting into distress. That might usefully be seen alongside the
information needed before a bank reaches the point of being unviable, when it might apply to
draw on the Bank’s public liquidity insurance facilities, notably the Discount Window. And
beyond that, a bank might seek Emergency Liquidity Assistance, where the Bank acts under
the Tripartite MoU. 5 In either circumstance, the Bank will need information on the bank’s
liquidity position and planning, and a lot of detailed information on the collateral it would be
offering. I therefore urge the BBA’s members to send the Bank (as well as, of course, the
FSA) your Contingency Funding Plans; and, secondly, to pre-position collateral with us for
the DWF.
Overall, we need to engage together constructively on what information the authorities need
in order to handle incipient or actual distress.

5

Paragraph 14 of the Memorandum of Understanding between HM Treasury, the Bank of England and the
Financial Services Authority says: "In exceptional circumstances, there may be a need for an operation which
goes beyond the Bank's published framework for operations in the money market. Such a support operation is
expected to happen very rarely and would normally only be undertaken in the case of a genuine threat to the
stability of the financial system to avoid a serious disturbance in the UK economy."

BIS Review 83/2009

5

Orderly wind down: writing “wills”
There is a broader issue lurking in the background here, and in today’s environment we can
and must address it openly.
Last Friday, in the Bank’s latest Financial Stability Report, we emphasised the importance
going forward of enhancing market discipline, notably through much better disclosures. But
proposals for greater market discipline are not going to gain traction in the real world – the
only world that matters – so long as wholesale creditors and others believe and act on the
basis that some firms can be Too Big To Fail. And, of course, it is not just TBTF. It can be
Too Interconnected To Fail too. And it is not just a problem with so-called LCFIs. As
demonstrated by the UK’s Secondary Banking Crisis in the 1970s, contagious distress
amongst smaller banks can threaten stability more widely when they are afflicted by shared
underlying problems: Too Similar To Fail, as one international colleague put it. And thinking
of the place of some banks or building societies in their local communities, we can also
confront Too Popular To Fail. 6 Putting aside that last notion, the solid point is that whether or
not one firm’s distress has systemic consequences will, as a general matter, depend on the
circumstances; but, very awkwardly, there are some firms, and some financial-infrastructure
providers, whose distress would currently be systemic in almost any imaginable
circumstances.
We need to sort all that out one way or another. It is part of a wider debate about the future
structure of the industry. The Bank is contributing to that debate, and a number of options
were discussed in our Financial Stability Report last week, including as the Governor said at
the Mansion House a fortnight ago, whether or not banks' activities should be regulated more
heavily or even in the extreme restricted. That debate is obviously difficult, with no easy
answers. But it is important, and cannot be ducked. As the Governor proposed at the
Mansion House, it would help greatly if your banks could write a “will” for how they could be
wound down in an orderly way in the face of distress. Indeed, that now has to be part of the
banking Social Contract.
It must surely entail a radical simplification of some group structures. Moving from, say, two
thousand legal entities to one thousand would, somehow, miss the point.
This will not be easy. We do understand that. But it is important to bring about the kind of
regime shift necessary to restore confidence and trust in the industry without a government
prop.
The degree to which banking groups cannot deliver on this should be reflected over time in
capital and liquidity requirements. As well as making distress itself less likely, that would also
help to shift incentives in a healthy direction.
I have talked throughout about banks. But the authorities will need to consider how far this
approach should extend. The Treasury already has power to put bank holding companies
into Temporary Public Ownership, but none of the regular SRR toolkit is available. And the
Treasury is also consulting on how investment banking distress should be handled in the
light of the problems with the Lehmans insolvency and administration since last autumn. 7
Cross-border resolutions
There is also a vital cross-border element to all of this, which absolutely must be recognised
and tackled if we are to establish sounder foundations for a world of free, global capital
markets.

6

I owe that expression to my colleague Paul Fisher.

7

See, HM Treasury (2009), “Developing effective resolution arrangements for investment banks”, May 2009.

6

BIS Review 83/2009

Around thirty-five years ago the founding document of the rules of the game for international
banking was issued: the Basel Concordat for the supervision of internationally active banks.
Although updated in the early 1980s to embrace consolidated supervision in the wake of
Banco Ambrosiano’s collapse, its essential precepts have remained unchanged. 8 Home
supervisors carry the responsibility for consolidated supervision. Broadly, hosts carry little or
no responsibility for branches, other than for liquidity, although it is not easy to pin down what
that means; but hosts carry somewhat greater responsibility for the soundness of
subsidiaries. (Within well-defined regional areas, variants can operate: eg passporting within
the EU.)
The point of rehearsing all that familiar stuff is that the division of labour for supervision of
banks during peacetime absolutely must be consistent with the insolvency and other regimes
that would operate in the event of failure or distress. Bluntly, it is no good assuming that an
internationally active bank can be regulated as a single unit if, when distress comes,
differences in the insolvency or resolution regimes of the various countries in which it
operates effectively split the bank into a series of de facto distinct, local entities.
The extra complications are legion, revolving around banking practice as well as resolution
regimes.
For example, if a group employs central liquidity management, as has been not uncommon,
host supervisors and creditors may wake up the morning after a failure to find that all the
group’s surplus liquidity is in another jurisdiction, available first to creditors there. This kind of
thing can unhelpfully alter the incentives for home regulators to be full and frank in their
exchanges with host supervisors. We should not overlook that when extolling the merits of
colleges of supervisors. But those problems should, given sufficient will and common
commitment, be trackable.
Even more difficult are the entanglements and conflicts between home and host insolvency
and resolution laws. There is, for example, a first-order difference between single-entity
insolvency regimes and separate-entity regimes. 9 The latter, for example in the US for
foreign banks, have the effect of de facto ring-fencing local assets for local depositors. And
even in countries that basically operate a single-entity regime, some (including the UK) would
have the option of putting a branch into liquidation pre-emptively to de facto ring fence it
before the home authorities had established a whole-bank insolvency procedure.
These issues are not new. In the aftermath of the BCCI closure, which affected many
countries, the BCBS produced a paper in 1992 on the difficulties confronted. 10 Arguably, the
authorities pulled their punches slightly. But, in any case, so far as I can tell, nothing was
done outside of Europe, where insolvency law for banks was adapted. In particular, the EU

8

George Blunden chaired the Basel Committee when the original document was produced; and Peter Cooke
did so in the 1980s.

9

In a single-entity insolvency regime, the home country authorities would seek to apply a single main
insolvency proceeding to a bank incorporated in their jurisdiction and to all its branches in other countries. This
is sometimes referred to as a universal approach to cross-border insolvency. This contrasts with a separateentity insolvency regime, in which separate insolvency proceedings may be applied to the parent bank (by the
home country) and its branches in other countries (by host countries); this constitutes a territorial approach to
cross-border insolvency.

10

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1992). “The insolvency liquidation of a multinational bank”, Bank for
International Settlements. Its key conclusions were: 1) when closing a multinational bank, supervisors should
pay attention to the nature and timing of communications among themselves and of their communications with
creditors, shareholders and management; 2) the nature of liquidation rules may be relevant to the manner in
which multinational banks are supervised; 3) differences in liquidation rules across jurisdictions in a windingup can affect returns to depositors and other creditors and the operations of deposit protection schemes; and
4) coordination and cooperation between liquidators can affect the returns to creditors in a liquidation and can
be affected by the role of supervisors in a liquidation.

BIS Review 83/2009

7

adopted the Credit Institutions Reorganisation and Winding-Up Directive, albeit after quite a
delay in 2001, under which a single-entity regime was introduced for the resolution of any
bank incorporated in the EEA, applying to the parent bank and also to all its branches
throughout the EEA.
A little less than a decade after the BCBS’s report on the lessons from BCCI, the
FSF/G10/BCBS produced a joint report on the orderly wind down of large and complex
financial institutions. It was a good report. It called for a range of things, including Factbooks
on key firms; contingency funding plans; wider crisis management plans; and so on. Perhaps
most important, it underlined that, at that time, no one really knew how to wind down an
LCFI. Quite a conclusion. A good one. It is a pity that the report wasn’t published. So far as I
can see, nothing much was done, internationally.
We now have another chance. A new round of work is now underway in the BCBS to identify
impediments or complications arising from national insolvency laws, resolution regimes, or
supervisory practices. I would be amazed if that group does not identify some material
issues, for the reasons I have discussed. If so, they should not be dismissed by the Top
Brass, left to worry only middle-ranking technocrats, as seems to have happened nearly
twenty years ago.
Perhaps most important, in April, the Financial Stability Forum (now renamed the Financial
Stability Board) issued Principles for Cross-Border Co-operation on Crisis Management. But
what really matters is that they were endorsed by the G20 Heads of Government at their
subsequent Summit. Which means that there is political endorsement for national authorities
to dilute their narrow attachment to local interests, recognising that in globalised markets
their interests will often best be served through co-operative solutions. Either that, or the
structure of international banking may have to change.
Given the starting point, the Principles are demanding. For each of the most important global
banks, the aim is that home and host authorities (regulators and central banks) should work
together to identify obstacles to effective management of crises. To that end, home
authorities are charged with ensuring that firms are capable of supplying the information
needed to manage a crisis. And firms are strongly encouraged to maintain contingency plans
to wind themselves down – as I have already said today, the Bank would like there to be
consideration of whether that could be a requirement for operating in the UK. And, as I also
made clear earlier, we do realise that all of that will be formidable, best approached with an
international consensus.
Similarly demanding is the requirement in the Principles that countries “strive” to find
internationally co-ordinated solutions, sharing information as freely as practicable. That is not
something which one could say has always been apparent over the past two years, although
it worked well on market operations. As the Principles recognise, the drive for greater
openness between authorities should not be permitted to jeopardise effective resolution
through leaks or pre-emptive action to ring-fence local interests.
I am reporting this because the FSB Principles have not got as much coverage as they
warrant. Yet it is very important that the banking world appreciates that, alongside other
issues and initiatives I have outlined this morning, they have the potential – indeed, are
intended – to bring about material changes in the way you structure your businesses, in how
you interact with the authorities, and in the wider environment in which you operate.
I hope that the Financial Stability Board Working Group on the Crisis Management Principles
will not hesitate to report back to the FSB, and through it to alert G20 Ministers, if
implementation is or looks to be stalling – whether because it is meeting with resistance from
the authorities or the industry, or blockages in national laws and practices.

8

BIS Review 83/2009

Concluding comment
This crisis has reminded a generation of some old truths. Banks can fail. But they matter
enormously to our economies, and so the authorities cannot afford to stand back and allow
disorderly systemic failure. Going forward, we cannot have a regime where the upside for
risk-taking goes to shareholders and management, but the downside falls to the general
taxpayer.
All three elements of the Social Contract for banking need to be reformed. Better regulation
and supervision, including a macroprudential element. Better arrangements for liquidity
insurance, which the Bank has tried to introduce alongside our international peers. And, my
main topic today, a new regime for resolving bank distress. In particular, banks must
structure and run themselves to permit orderly wind down. And they must invest to provide
the authorities with the information they need to do so.
This will not be easy. And it will not be cheap. Together with higher capital and liquidity
requirements – lower leverage and reduced maturity transformations – over time it may well
mean a lower headline return on equity for some banks. But, of course, it would also entail
lower risk for bank equity and bond investors, and surely it is risk-adjusted returns that
matter. And it would also deliver lower risk to society more generally, which matters hugely.
To be clear, we want banks and the financial sector more generally to thrive. The institution I
come from believes in a market economy, in capitalism. The financial sector has played an
enormous role in the development of modern economies. But a regime in which banks can
thrive standing on your own feet would be a better market – for all of us.

BIS Review 83/2009

9

Andrew G Haldane: Small lessons from a big crisis
Remarks by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England,
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 45th Annual Conference “Reforming Financial
Regulation”, Chicago, 8 May 2009.
I would like to thank Andrew Mason, Adrian Chiu, David Gregory and Nick Vause for comments and contributions.

*

*

*

Macro-prudential policy is a new ideology and a big idea. That befits what is, without
question, a big crisis. There are a great many unanswered questions before this ideology can
be put into practice. These questions will shape the intellectual and public policy debate over
the next several decades, just as the Great Depression shaped the macroeconomic policy
debate from the 1940s to the early 1970s.
But there are already some smaller lessons to be drawn from crisis events. That is the
purpose of these comments. Seven issues arising from the crisis are discussed and their
implications for policymakers and practitioners assessed.
If there is a unifying theme, it is informational failure. This has been a crisis borne of, and
prolonged by, lack of information. That fog of uncertainty remains dense 18 months on.
Because financial markets are, first and foremost, a market in information, these
informational failures have generated prolonged paralysis in financial markets. Tackling them
is priority number one.
Lesson 1: Finance is no golden goose
Imagine having placed a hedged bet back in 1900. A £100 long bet is placed on UK financial
sector equities together with a £100 short bet on general UK equities. In effect, this is a
gamble on the UK financial sector outperforming the market. How would that bet have
performed over the intervening 110 or so years?
Chart 1 provides the answer. For around the first 85 years, this gamble looks like a rather
staid strategy. By 1985, it would have delivered a capital sum of £500, at a modest annual
average return of around 2% per year. There were periods of both over-performance (19001944) and under-performance (1971-1986) by the financial sector over this period. But, give
or take, this was close to a break-even strategy.
The following twenty year period, from 1986 to 2006, transformed that picture. By the end of
2006, the once-staid strategy would have delivered a capital sum of over £10,000, at an
annual average return of over 16%. Banking became the goose laying the golden eggs.
There is no period in recent UK financial history which bears comparison.
The past two years have undone most of those gains. The cumulative fall in UK bank
equities up to its low point in March is the largest on record at over 80%, outstripping the fall
following first oil price shock in 1973/74 and the stock market crash of 1929. By the end of
2008, the banking gamble would have delivered a capital sum of £2,200, at an annual
average return over the 110 year period of less than 3%. Financials have reverted to being
close to a break-even strategy. That is broadly what long-run growth theory would lead us to
expect.
So what lessons should we take from this? Many practitioners and policymakers were
seduced by the excess returns to finance during that twenty-year golden era. Banks
appeared to have discovered a money machine, albeit one whose workings were sometimes

BIS Review 85/2009

1

impossible to understand. One of the South Sea stocks was memorably “a company for
carrying out an undertaking of great advantage, but nobody to know what it is”. 1 Banking
became the 21st century equivalent.
We should aspire to a financial system where there is greater market and regulatory scrutiny
of future such money machines. In achieving this, there is a role for some body – a systemic
overseer – which is able to detect incipient bubbles and fads and, as importantly, act to
correct them. This role is about removing the punchbowl from future financial sector parties.
Lesson 2: Unless the golden goose is geared
At one level, the crisis tells us that banks may not be special after all, at least in terms of their
long-run profitability. There is, however, one dimension along which banks are a different
animal: leverage. To see this, consider a simple decomposition of return on equity (ROE) for
a firm:
(1)

ROE = Return on Assets * Leverage

The first term is a measure of management skill in extracting profits from a pool of assets.
The second is a measure of gambler’s luck in gearing up those assets. In effect, ROE is skill
multiplied by luck. So which has been the dominant determinant of banks’ ROE, historically
and recently?
Chart 2 looks at the decomposition given by equation (1) for UK banks over the period since
1920. Movements in leverage have clearly been the dominant driver. Since 2000, rising
leverage fully accounts for movements in UK banks’ ROE – both the rise to around 24% in
2007 and the subsequent fall into negative territory in 2008.
Chart 3 looks at the same decomposition across a panel of 70 global banks at the end of
2007. The vertical axis measures return on assets and the horizontal axis leverage. The
curves are iso-ROE lines, drawn at 5%, 20% and 40%. The distribution of points lies along a
downward-sloping curve. Two implications follow from this.
First, the downward slope is consistent with global banks targeting a ROE, perhaps
benchmarked by peers’ performance. The Bank’s market intelligence in the run-up to crisis
suggested that such “keeping up with the Jones’s” was an important cultural influence on
banks’ decision-making. Second, Chart 3 suggests that banks kept up in this competitive
race by gearing-up. Banks unable to deliver sufficiently high returns on assets to meet their
ROE targets resorted instead to leveraging their balance sheets.
During the golden era, competition simultaneously drove down returns on assets and drove
up target returns on equity. Caught in this cross-fire, higher leverage became banks’ only
means of keeping up with the Jones’s. Management resorted to the roulette wheel. As firms
collectively migrated South-east in Chart 3, leverage increased across the financial system
as a whole. Having bet the bank on black, many financial firms ended up in the red.
Two lessons for the future suggest themselves from this prognosis. First, when evaluating
banks and their management, there is a need for greater focus on returns on assets rather
than on equity. Good luck and good management need to be better distinguished. Put
differently, returns to investors and managers need to be more accurately risk-adjusted if the
right balance between risk and return is to be struck for individual firms and for the financial
system as a whole.
Second, there is a need to place much stricter system-wide limits on leverage. These limits
should aim to prevent the South-Easterly migration by banks under competitive pressure.

1

2

Charles McKay (1841), “Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds”, London:
Richard Bentley.

BIS Review 85/2009

That suggests these ratios will need to be state-dependent, rising as the temperature rises
across the financial system as a whole. Some have called this a counter-cyclical regime.
Given its source, it might better be called a counter-cultural regime.
Lesson 3: Size does matter
The “80/20 rule” has its origin in the study of contagious diseases. For a number of diseases,
20% of the population account for around 80% of the disease spread. The present financial
epidemic has broadly mirrored those dynamics. The failure of a core set of large,
interconnected institutions – Fannie and Freddie, Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, AIG –
contributed disproportionately to the spread of financial panic.
Epidemiology provides a second key lesson for financial policymakers – the importance of
targeted vaccination of these “super-spreaders” of financial contagion. Historically, financial
regulation has tended not to heed that message. As Chart 4 demonstrates, larger
polygamous financial institutions have if anything run with lower capital buffers than their
smaller monogamous partners.
There are two potential explanations for this seemingly perverse result. First, Basel II
conferred diversification benefits on larger firms. Second, even ahead of crisis there was a
market expectation that larger firms were more likely to receive government support. As
Chart 5 illustrates, those expectations have subsequently been validated by events, with the
largest packages of official sector capital support having gone to the biggest global banks.
Hastily convened marriages between institutions during the crisis have increased the size
and degree of concentration within the banking industry.
So regulation may have contributed to perverse risk-taking incentives among large,
interconnected firms. And subsequent interventions may have worsened those incentives. In
response, the authorities in a number of countries have recently announced their intention to
tackle this incentive problem, by better aligning regulatory taxes with firms’ systemic
importance. No country has as yet turned that statement of intent into an operational
framework for systemic regulation. Doing so will require an understanding of the network of
connections between firms, which at present is lacking.
Lesson 4: Banks cannot “pass” a stress test
Over the past six months, stress-tests have moved from the back-offices of risk managers to
the front offices of the world’s media. Assessments of the balance sheet consequences of tail
macroeconomic risks are now in the bloodstream of financial policymakers. They also
appear, belatedly, to be entering the bloodstream of financial firms. That is real progress.
But as with all technical progress, there is some danger of an overshoot. While the inputs to,
and outputs from, stress-testing are statistical, the inferences reached from them are
necessarily subjective. Stress-tests are probabilistic and state-dependent judgements. Two
of the key judgements are, first, what prescribed stress scenarios are appropriate inputs; and
second, what thresholds for satisfying these stress-tests are set. Both are fiendishly difficult.
On the first, a stress scenario is just one point in a probability distribution. Which point to
choose – indeed, which distribution to choose – is a matter of judgement. Consider the two
distributions for UK GDP growth shown in Chart 6, one taken from the ten years to 2007, the
other across a longer 150-year sample. 2 The standard deviations of these two distributions
differ by a factor of 4.5. For a financial firm that is 30-times leveraged, that can easily be the

2

See Haldane (2009a), “Why Banks Failed the Stress Test”. See
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech374.pdf

BIS Review 85/2009

3

difference between landing in the red rather than the black. In that sense, stress tests are not
something it is possible definitively to “pass” – though experience suggests they are
somewhat easier to “fail”.
On thresholds, determining the optimal level of capital for a bank is an area which has been
chronically, and perhaps surprisingly, under-researched. Policymakers have repeatedly
ducked this question. Aggregate amounts of capital in the financial system have been fixed
at the same levels which prevailed at the time of the first Basel Accord. And academics have,
to my knowledge, no definitive quantitative answer to the optimal capital question.
Longer runs of data, while interesting, are far from definitive. Over the past 150 years, capital
ratios among US commercial banks have fallen roughly by a factor of ten (Chart 7). Is the
optimal capital ratio to be found from experience in the 1990s – roughly, 5%? Or from the
interwar years – roughly 10%? Or from the latter half of the 19th century – between 20% and
40%?
Answering those questions will mean reassessing the validity of the Modigliani/Miller (MM)
theorem in today’s capital markets. 3 MM states that firms’ debt/equity ratios are essentially
irrelevant to their total cost of capital. Why? Because a rise in leverage generates offsetting
movements in the cost and risk of banks’ capital, in a frictionless world leaving the riskadjusted cost of capital unchanged.
By revealed preference, owners and managers of banks have rejected the MM hypothesis.
They seem to perceive that raising equity is, in some sense, costly. Perhaps they are right.
But, equally, it is possible that these perceptions are distorted – for example, because the
cost of equity is mistaken for the total cost of banks’ capital, or because managerial and
shareholder incentives are linked to equity rather than asset returns, as outlined earlier.
Either way, the MM hypothesis needs to be objectively reassessed in a banking context. And
until then, stress tests need to be administered with a healthy dose of realism.
Lesson 5: The plumbing worked
With so much having gone wrong during this crisis, it is easy to overlook what has gone right.
Well-functioning payment and settlement systems – the plumbing of the financial system –
are one such unheralded success. To my knowledge, there are no examples of these
systems collapsing under the strain of the financial crisis. This is no small achievement.
Pressures on participants within payment systems have been acute. And volumes flowing
through these systems have picked up sharply during periods of volatility in asset prices – for
example, in the foreign exchange settlement system CLS (Chart 8).
The robustness of these systems is no fluke. It is testimony to the efforts made over the past
twenty of so years, initially by central banks, to proof these systems against systemic risk.
These developments included the introduction of real-time gross settlement (RTGS) in
payment systems, delivery-versus-payment (DvP) in securities settlement systems and
payment-versus-payment (PvP) in foreign currency settlement systems. These innovations
effectively removed principal counterparty risk from the transactions equation.
This infrastructural revolution largely went unnoticed at the time and risks going unnoticed
now. Its effects can be seen by counter-factually asking what might have happened during
the present crisis without it. With counterparty risk preserved, banks would have delayed
payments or transactions for fear of extending uncollateralized credit to institutions of
unknown credit quality. Payment systems may have suffered the same seizures felt by

3

4

Miller, M and Modigliani, F (1958), “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of Investment”,
American Economic Review 48 (3).

BIS Review 85/2009

money markets during the crisis. There would have been an irreparable blockage in the
plumbing.
In the event, activity in most financial markets has remained strong, allowing risk to be traded
and relocated. Robust payments infrastructure played a key, if largely silent, role in this
positive outcome. Though neither visible nor audible, this underscores the importance of
systemic oversight, and redesign, of payment and settlement infrastructures by central
banks.
Lesson 6: But some plumbing was missing
The infrastructure of financial markets extends well beyond payment and settlement systems
– for example, into the area of trading and clearing systems. Here, crisis events suggest
scope for improvement. A number of markets have seized during the past 18 months,
including at various times the foreign exchange swap market, the corporate bond market,
structured credit markets, various derivative markets such as CDS and, perhaps most
strikingly, the money market.
These are all Over-the-Counter (OTC) markets. As such, they do not typically benefit from
clearing through a Central Counterparty (CCP). CCPs effectively eliminate counterparty risk
between trading participants. This crisis has been, first and foremost, a crisis of counterparty
risk. So it is perhaps unsurprising that some OTC markets without a CCP have been hardest
hit.
Against this backdrop, the US authorities have recently proposed the extension of central
clearing to all standardised OTC derivative instruments. 4 This is a bold measure and one
which deserves international support. In time, it might usefully be extended beyond OTC
derivatives to some cash OTC instruments, such as corporate bonds. The benefits of this
shift are essentially threefold.
First, central clearing encourages standardisation and simplification of the contractual terms
of financial instruments. Instrument complexity has been a key fault-line exposed during the
crisis, especially among bespoke structured credit products. Ahead of crisis, standardisation
was seen as a pre-requisite for central clearing. CCPs should be better seen as a catalyst for
such standardisation. In future, infrastructure design might usefully shape market convention,
rather than vice-versa.
Second, because a CCP represents a potential single point of failure, it needs to be bulletproof. Standards of resilience should be comparable with other public utilities, such as water,
gas and electricity. That has implications both for CCP risk management standards and for
governance arrangements. Both need importantly to weigh the public good of systemic risk
containment.
Third, a CCP condenses the dense network of interconnections between firms into a
sequence of simple bilateral relationships with the CCP. The cats-cradle becomes a huband-spokes. This can have important benefits in reducing uncertainty among market
participants, which might otherwise impair the functioning of markets.
As an illustration, Charts 9 and 10 consider the pricing of CDS contracts. 5 Pre-crisis, with
counterparty risk low, the numbers of counterparties in the network chain is essentially
irrelevant for CDS pricing (Chart 9). That picture changes dramatically once counterparty risk

4

See http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/tg129.htm.

5

Further analysis is given in Haldane (2009b), “Rethinking
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf

BIS Review 85/2009

the

Financial

Network”.

See

5

rises (Chart 10). Indeterminacies in CDS prices – and thus market impairments – then arise.
These are larger, the greater the length of the network chain.
A CCP effectively cuts through this uncertainty problem. By interposing itself in each
transaction, it condenses the network chain to a single link. Counterparty uncertainty is all
but eliminated – and with it indeterminacies in prices and the potential for financial market
impairment.
Taken together, these benefits present a compelling case for reform of the post-trade
infrastructure of a number of OTC markets. Delivering that reform may call for a rather more
interventionist stance by the authorities than has been the case in the recent past. Past
revolutions in the payment and settlement infrastructure may provide a road-map for
delivering that reform and for understanding its benefits.
Lesson 7: Banks’ profits were the problem – but are now the solution
The shock to global banks’ profitability from the crisis has been sharp and severe (Charts
11). Judging by the response of banks’ equity prices, it may also be prolonged. Despite the
recent recovery, the market capitalisation of global banks has fallen by $3 trillion since the
crisis began. In part, this is a reflection of banks’ business models having been reassessed.
But it also reflects fears of future intervention to curtail banks’ risk-taking and profit-seeking.
As unfashionable as it may sound, it is important that banks’ profitability picks up, sharply
and durably, in the period ahead. From a systemic perspective, this is in the interests of both
the financial system and the real economy.
In the short term, lending by banks is a necessary condition for recovery in the real economy.
And a recovery in lending is best achieved if banks believe new loans will be profitable.
Some of the pre-conditions for profitable lending are already in place. For example, margins
on new lending have widened fairly sharply, as new lending terms have been re-priced
(Chart 12). In other industries, this would serve as the price signal inducing existing banks to
begin lending and for new banks to enter the lending market seeking market share.
Over the medium-term, global banks have a hefty repayment schedule to governments and
central banks. Encouragingly, the flow of repayment has already commenced for some
banks. But repayments still total several trillion dollars and are spread over several years.
Banks’ future profit streams are a key means of securing these repayments and thereby
restoring banks to normality. Bank profitability may well have been the route into the present
crisis. But it may also be a route out.

6

BIS Review 85/2009

Chart 1: Cumulative excess returns to finance

%

12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
-2000

1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
Sources: Global Financial Data and Bank calculations.

Chart 2: Contributions to year-on-year UK financial equity returns
Percentage points
140

Return on Assets

120

Leverage

100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Sources: Global Financial data, MFSD and FRD.
(a) Using year-on-year observed return on equity and observed unweighted
leverage ratio to infer year-on-year returns.
(b) Green lines show period average effect of leverage on year-on-year return
on equity for 1920-1945, 1945-71, 1971-86 and 1986-2007.

BIS Review 85/2009

7

Chart 3: Return on assets and leverage for global banks, end-2007

Pre tax profit/Total assets
4.0%
3.5%
3.0%
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
-0.5% 0

10

20

30

-1.0%

40

50

60

Total assets/Tier 1 capital

Source: Bankscope

Chart 4: Tier 1 Leverage ratio and Total assets for global banks, end-2007

Tier 1 Ratio (%)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.0

0.3

0.6

0.9

1.2

1.5

1.8

Total Assets (£trillion)

Source: Bankscope

8

BIS Review 85/2009

Chart 5: Capital injections and balance sheet size, end-2007

Capital injections ($ billions)
60
50
40
30
20
10
-

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0
2.5
3.0
Total assets ($ trillions)

Source: Bank of England

Chart 6: Probability Densities of UK GDP Growth

Density
1857-2007
1998-2007

-15

-10

-5

0
5
10
Annual GDP Growth (%)

15

Sources: Office for National Statistics and Bank calculations.

BIS Review 85/2009

9

Chart 7: Long-run capital levels for US commercial banks, 1840-1993

Chart 8: Daily volumes and values settled in CLS

10

BIS Review 85/2009

Chart 9: CDS premia and network uncertainty – pre-crisis

Chart 10: CDS premia and network uncertainty – in-crisis

BIS Review 85/2009

11

Chart 11: LCFI return on common equity

Per cent
30
20
10
0
-10

US securities houses
US commercial banks
European LCFIs
UK LCFIs

-20
-30
-40

Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3
2003 04
05
06
07
08
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Data for European LCFIs and UK LCFIs are half-yearly.

Chart 12: Spreads on new mortgage lending by the major UK banks
Per cent
4

Maximum-minimum range
Interquartile range
Median

3
2
1
0
+
12
Jan

Apr

Jul

2007

Oct

Jan

Apr
08

Jul

Oct

Jan
09

Source: Bank of England.

12

BIS Review 85/2009

Spencer Dale: Inflation targeting – learning the lessons from the financial
crisis
Speech by Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of
England, at the Society of Business Economists’ Annual Conference, London, 23 June 2009.
I would like to thank Rohan Churm, Jens Larsen and Rob Wood for their considerable help in preparing these
remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary
Policy Committee.

*

*

*

We are in the midst of a deep recession.
Unlike recessions of the late twentieth century, this twenty-first century version is not the
result of deliberate, but belated, attempts to slow the expansion of money spending in order
to bring down inflation from very high levels. Inflation is close to the Government’s 2% target.
This recession has at its heart a crisis in the banking system; a crisis that has strangled the
supply of credit and undermined public confidence. For the first time in fifty years, the total
amount of money spent in our economy during the first quarter of this year was lower than a
year earlier. The era of “Great Stability” is over.
The Great Stability followed hot on the heels of the introduction of the inflation targeting
framework for monetary policy. Some attributed part of the improvement in economic
performance to better policymaking. The abrupt end to that stability has, in turn, led the
inflation targeting framework to be questioned.
Today I want to explain why, despite recent events, I believe that inflation targeting should
remain a mainstay of macroeconomic policymaking in the UK. But we have to learn from the
crisis, and I will discuss my views on the way in which the policy framework needs to be
strengthened. I will conclude with a brief review of our asset purchase programme and, in
particular, respond to some of the comments made about the programme.
1.

Inflation targeting in action

Over the past year, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has responded to the dramatic
deterioration in the economic outlook with an equally dramatic easing in monetary policy.
Bank Rate was cut by 4.5 percentage points in just six months and by 1.5 percentage points
in November last year alone. That was the largest cut for 25 years and is twice the size of
any reduction made by another G7 central bank in the past eighteen months. The MPC also
voted to purchase £125bn of assets financed by the issuance of central bank money –
equivalent to around 9% of annual UK GDP.
The scale of the easing took many by surprise and some of the decisions may, at first blush,
look rather courageous. Those of you who remember “Yes Minister” may recall that Jim
Hacker, the hapless minister, became very nervous whenever Sir Humphrey suggested his
decision was “courageous”. Central bankers can have similar instincts. When faced with big
decisions, there is a temptation for caution to prevail: do interest rates really need to be
moved by that much? Why not wait and see before resorting to the use of unconventional
instruments?
And indeed the MPC has tended to move rates in relatively small, sequential steps in the
past. But I would argue that this is because for much of the period since the MPC was
established the outlook for inflation evolved relatively gradually. That all changed following
the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Since the autumn of last year, we have experienced an
unprecedented sequence of events that has caused a substantial re-assessment of the
economic outlook and of the stance of policy necessary to keep inflation on track to meet the
target. As the economy slowed sharply and inflation threatened to fall substantially below the

BIS Review 86/2009

1

target, the Committee responded with unprecedented actions that were previously confined
largely to the realms of theory.
I believe that the operation of monetary policy during this period demonstrates the strength of
the inflation targeting framework in action. The clear numerical target, combined with a
framework of transparency and accountability, impose discipline on the MPC. They ensure
that we take the decisions necessary to bring inflation back to target, however “courageous”
those decisions might seem.
I do not think it is coincidence that arguably the two most significant monetary policy
decisions taken over the past year – the decision to reduce Bank Rate by 1.5 percentage
points in November and the announcement in February that the Committee had sought
approval to use the Asset Purchase Facility to conduct large scale asset purchases –
occurred in months when the Inflation Report was published. The quarterly forecast round
provides an opportunity for the Committee to reassess thoroughly its view of the economic
outlook. This view is then explained and communicated via the Inflation Report and in
particular through the projections for GDP growth and inflation contained in the Report. In
both November and February, the judgement of the Committee was that, without further
substantial easing in monetary policy, there was a significant risk of a large and persistent
undershoot of the inflation target. Given the transparency of these judgements and the clarity
of the target, it would have been courageous not to have taken the decisions we did.
The inflation target is symmetric. Likewise, the discipline it imposes on the MPC is
symmetric. The inflation target has been instrumental in ensuring that monetary policy has
responded boldly and decisively to the events that have unfolded since the autumn. And,
when the time comes, the clarity and transparency of the inflation targeting framework will
ensure that the Committee takes the right decisions on the way back up, however
courageous or unpopular those decisions might appear.
The public commitment that the Committee will do whatever it takes to hit the inflation target
is central to the conduct of monetary policy. It underpins the credibility of the inflation target.
This commitment is more important than ever in the current environment of unprecedented
shocks and unconventional policy measures.
Recent events have raised the question of whether the Committee could provide even more
information about its policy strategy by committing to keep interest rates low for a particular
period of time or until the economic outlook evolves in some specified way.
The difficulty is in designing such a commitment that would be both useful and that the
Committee would be willing to adhere to. A commitment to keep interest rates low for a
certain period of time runs the risk of being overtaken by events. The past eighteen months
has demonstrated only too well how rapidly the state of the economy can change. I truly
have little idea as to how long Bank Rate will need to be maintained at its current low level in
order to meet the inflation target. As such, it would make little sense to commit to a rule that
suggested I did!
The potential benefit of a state contingent commitment – in which the MPC commits to
maintaining Bank Rate at its current level until the economic outlook has evolved in a
particular way – is that it may aid the public’s understanding of how the Committee is likely to
react to economic developments. It may convey information about our reaction function. But
such a commitment is not easy to design. If too general, it will not add anything to our
existing – and over-riding – commitment to do whatever it takes to hit the inflation target. If
too precise, it will not capture the myriad of factors that affect the outlook for inflation. The
array of judgements underlying the Committee’s policy decisions are not easily summarised
by reference to one or two economic variables.
The Committee’s preferred approach is to describe its assessment of the outlook for output
and inflation, and allow the public and markets to make their own assessment of the likely
future path of interest rates. In the most recent Inflation Report published in May, the

2

BIS Review 86/2009

Committee judged it was more likely than not that CPI inflation would be below the 2%
inflation target in two or three years time if interest rates followed a path implied by market
yields and the stock of purchased assets increased to £125bn. Market participants
subsequently revised down their view about the pace at which Bank Rate was likely to rise.
2.

Strengthening the policy framework

I remain firmly convinced that an inflation targeting framework should continue to be central
to the design of macroeconomic policy in the UK. The benefits of low and stable inflation are
clear and well understood. And, as I have argued, the combination of a clear quantitative
target and an open and transparent policy regime have been instrumental in shaping the
response of monetary policy to the current crisis and will continue to be so.
But recent events must serve as a wake up call for policymakers. The spectacle of bank
runs, asset price falls and a sharp unwinding of economic imbalances testifies that inflation
targeting as currently operated is not sufficient. How should the macroeconomic policy
framework in the UK be strengthened to reduce the likelihood of such events reoccurring?
One common suggestion is that the conduct of policy under inflation targeting should be
modified to take greater account of movements in asset prices or economic imbalances that
threaten the attainment of the inflation target, even if those risks may not materialise for
several years. In principle, the remit given to the MPC provides the latitude for policy to
respond to such medium-term risks. In particular, the Committee’s objective is timeless – it is
tasked with keeping inflation close to target “at all times” in the future. Therefore, if the
Committee judged that intentionally undershooting the inflation target in the near term would
help to reduce the risk of a much larger deviation from target in the future, it has the scope to
follow such a policy.
But a policy of “leaning against the wind” is difficult to implement in practice.
In part this reflects the difficulty of identifying changes in asset prices and economic flows
which are unsustainable. At which point, for example, did the run up in UK house prices over
the past 10 years cease to be warranted by a change in economic fundamentals, such as the
rise in the number of households and the move to a low and stable inflation environment?
Likewise, at which point did it become clear that sub-prime lending had ceased to be a
beneficial financial innovation with the scope to allow people who had not previously had
access to credit the chance to own their own home and had instead become a source of
international financial instability?
These are difficult judgements. They involve second guessing outcomes generated by
financial and economic markets. Policymakers will inevitably sometimes get the assessment
wrong, with costly repercussions. But these judgements cannot be ducked. Monetary
policymakers have to form views about a range of uncertain and ill-defined issues, such as
the level of potential supply and the credibility of policy. The sustainability of asset prices and
economic imbalances are no different. Ultimately, a policy has to be set even if explicit
judgements are not formed.
But policymakers also need better tools to back up these judgements with actions. Shortterm interest rates are a blunt instrument best deployed maintaining a broad balance
between nominal demand and supply. They are not well suited to the task of managing asset
price bubbles and economic imbalances. They may be wholly ineffective in addressing some
types of imbalances, particularly those with an international dimension. And, even for
domestic imbalances, short-term interest rates would probably need to be held substantially
higher for a persistent period in order to suppress rapid rises in asset prices or growing
imbalances. Such policy actions could generate significant economic costs.
The practical difficulty of implementing a policy of “leaning against the wind”, where the main
policy instrument is short-term interest rates, should not be underestimated. If, as

BIS Review 86/2009

3

policymakers, we were successful in preventing a bubble from inflating, it might appear as if
we were responding to phantom concerns. The bubble or imbalance would be nowhere to be
seen, but interest rates would be higher, inflation would undershoot the inflation target and
we would appear to have inflicted unnecessary economic hardship. That could undermine
public faith and support in both the inflation target and the MPC.
For me, the single most important lesson from the financial crisis is the need to expand the
range of instruments available to policymakers. The inflation targeting framework provides
the scope to respond to asset price bubbles and to imbalances that threaten future economic
stability. But short-term interest rates are not well suited to managing such risks.
The precise design of such new instruments is now the focus of much work and analysis. It is
likely that a range of instruments and initiatives will be required. These may extend beyond
new regulatory instruments and should embrace the need for greater international policy
coordination. The ideal would be policy instruments and processes which are effective in
preventing the build up of asset price bubbles and economic imbalances and efficient in
minimising the associated costs to the real economy. This would allow short-term interest
rates to continue to be the primary tool for hitting the inflation target in the short-to-medium
term, supported by additional instruments which are used to manage emerging imbalances
which may pose substantial risks to economic stability further out.
Strengthening the policy framework in this way should lead to greater economic and financial
stability. But we should not be lulled into a false sense that it will solve all our problems.
Operating such a framework will continue to require finely balanced judgements and difficult
decisions. And no policy toolkit can anticipate all future changes to the structure of markets
and the economy, or to the shocks hitting them. The process of increasing the robustness of
the macroeconomic policy framework should be seen as continuous, not a one-off response
to the current crisis.
3.

A response to some criticisms of the asset purchase programme

Strengthening the policy framework in this way should help to reduce the likelihood of future
crises. I thought I would end today with a few words on the progress we are making in
managing the current crisis and, in particular, by addressing some of the concerns that have
been raised about the asset purchase programme.
As you know, the objective of the asset purchase programme is to increase the growth of
nominal spending to a rate consistent with meeting the inflation target. There are a number of
channels through which the asset purchases should help to stimulate demand. Purchases of
gilts are likely to cause investors to reallocate their portfolios into other assets, including
corporate bonds and equities. This increase in demand for corporate assets should help to
reduce borrowing costs faced by firms. Moreover, expansion in the supply of money and
liquidity may in itself encourage greater levels of lending and borrowing. Not least, bank
deposits are likely to increase as a result of our asset purchases, providing banks with a
ready source of funding. Purchases of private sector debt should aid the functioning of
corporate credit markets and so improve the availability of credit via these markets. And the
programme of asset purchases should help to demonstrate the Committee’s ability and
willingness to do whatever it takes to hit the inflation target and so help to ensure that
inflation expectations remained firmly anchored.
The Bank has so far purchased a little over £96bn of assets and is on track to have
purchased £125bn of assets by the end of July. It is still early days in terms of judging the
ultimate success of the programme in stimulating nominal spending, but initial indications
remain encouraging. The growth rate of underlying broad money has picked up in recent
months. Gilt yields fell sharply following the announcement of the asset purchase programme
and our initial purchases of gilts. Yields have subsequently drifted back up, but this reflects a
range of other factors and it is likely that yields are lower than they would otherwise have

4

BIS Review 86/2009

been. Borrowing costs within the commercial paper market appear to have fallen as a result
of our operations. And in the corporate bond market, spreads have narrowed sharply in
recent months and issuance levels have been at record highs. However, this has coincided
with a global rally in corporate bond markets and so it is difficult to isolate the incremental
impact of our purchases.
Despite these encouraging signs, there have been some questions raised about the design
and effectiveness of our operations, and I thought I would take this opportunity to address
three particular criticisms that have been levelled against the asset purchase programme.
The first is that the asset purchases have been too heavily skewed towards gilts and that we
should have purchased a greater proportion of private sector debt. The aim of our purchases
of corporate debt is to improve the functioning of corporate credit markets. This is in line with
the remit specified by the Chancellor when establishing the Asset Purchase Facility. It is
important not to judge the economic significance of these purchases by their scale. Even
relatively small purchases of debt, if appropriately targeted, can improve liquidity and lower
the cost of finance to businesses. Indeed, the very knowledge that the Bank stands ready to
purchase assets may be as beneficial as the actual purchases. And over a period of time, as
market functioning improves, the quantity of private sector assets held by the Asset
Purchase Facility may well decline as assets mature and are rolled over into the private
market. This should be seen as a sign of success not of dwindling support.
The Bank continues to review actively the case for extending its operations into other
corporate credit markets, and recently announced its intention to extend its purchases to
include commercial paper secured on loans for working capital. But given the relatively
modest size of corporate credit markets in the UK, to increase significantly the scale of our
corporate debt purchases would involve changing the nature of our operations. Rather than
improve their functioning, large scale asset purchases would risk crowding out private debt
markets: substituting for markets rather than supporting them. That is not consistent with the
aims of the Asset Purchase Facility and could detract from the long-term efficiency of the
economy.
A second criticism that is sometimes made against the asset purchase programme is that
some of the gilts we have purchased have been from foreign investors and this may limit the
effectiveness of the purchases. This argument is based on the supposition that overseas
investors may be more likely to reallocate their portfolios into foreign currency assets, rather
than into alternative sterling assets, such as corporate bonds or UK equities. But even if that
is the case, it does not mean the asset purchases will not have any economic benefit.
Rather, more of the effect will come through a lower exchange rate than through a change in
the relative price of domestic assets. As with interest rate changes, the exchange rate is a
key channel through which the monetary easing may be transmitted. Moreover, it is
important to remember that the additional sterling liquidity created by the original asset
purchase still exists. Someone is holding additional sterling deposits and it is possible that
these may flow back into sterling assets as investors reallocate their portfolios.
The final criticism that I want to address is that the MPC needs to articulate more clearly its
exit strategy. This brings us back to where we started, and the importance of the inflation
target. It was the outlook for inflation relative to target that dictated the speed and magnitude
of the dramatic loosening in monetary policy. And likewise, it will be the outlook for inflation
relative to target that will determine the rate at which the current exceptional degree of
monetary stimulus is withdrawn as economic prospects recover. When the time comes, the
Committee can tighten policy both by raising Bank Rate and by selling assets. A natural
corollary of both actions is that yields will rise – that is what happens when policy is
tightened. The most difficult issue concerning the exit strategy will be deciding the timing at
which policy should begin to be tightened. Although that decision will be highly uncertain and
subject to intense scrutiny, the strategy guiding the decision – and the primacy of the inflation
target within that strategy – should be clear.

BIS Review 86/2009

5

4.

Conclusion

The inflation target remains a vital pillar of the macroeconomic policy framework and should
continue to provide the focus for monetary policy. But there are lessons that need to be
learnt from this financial crisis. Good policy frameworks should provide policymakers with the
right incentives to take difficult decisions and the right tools to implement those decisions.
Inflation targeting goes a long way: the clarity of the objective and the transparency of the
regime act as an important discipline on the MPC and short-term interest rates are, for the
most part, effective in maintaining a broad balance between nominal demand and supply and
so generating low and stable inflation. But they are not well suited to nipping incipient
bubbles in the bud and restricting burgeoning imbalances. Policymakers need to make
difficult judgements about asset prices and imbalances but they also need effective and
efficient tools to enact those judgements.

6

BIS Review 86/2009

Charles Bean: The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great
Contraction
Text of the Schumpeter Lecture by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy
and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England, at the Annual Congress of
the European Economic Association, Barcelona, 25 August 2009.
I am grateful for the assistance of Adrian Penalver. The views expressed are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect those of either the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee.

*

*

*

Summary
Charles Bean, the Bank of England’s Deputy Governor, Monetary Policy, was invited to
deliver the Schumpeter lecture at the Annual Congress of the European Economic
Association. The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction, looks back at
the causes of the financial crisis and subsequent recession. He argues that much of what
went wrong can be analysed using standard economic tools.
The Great Moderation was a period of unusually stable macroeconomic activity in advanced
economies. This was partly thanks to good luck, including the integration of emerging market
countries into the global economy, and partly a dividend from structural economic changes
and better policy frameworks. The longer this stability persisted, the more markets became
convinced of its permanence and risk premia became extremely low. Real short and long
term interest rates were also low due to a combination of loose monetary policy, particularly
in the US, and strong savings rates in a number of surplus countries.
Low interest rates and low apparent risk created strong incentives for financial institutions to
become highly geared. Unfortunately much of this leverage occurred off-balance sheet in
order to avoid on-balance sheet capital charges. The innovative financial instruments
developed to achieve this were highly complex. This complexity did not seem to matter when
markets were steady and defaults low but was fatal once conditions deteriorated, as it
became impossible to understand and price these instruments objectively. Leveraged
institutions were trapped; as their assets sank in value and funding dried up, buyers became
wary – a classic lemons problem. As losses moved inexorably towards institutions at the
heart of the financial system, the complexity of the inter-bank network created enormous
uncertainty about the extent of counterparty risk.
Uncertainties in the financial system were transmitted to the real economy after the collapse
of Lehman Brothers as expectations of future credit tightening, higher precautionary savings
and the postponement of investment took a sudden and widespread toll on global demand.
This made the task of deleveraging in the financial system even more difficult and the
tightening of credit more severe. Central banks responded aggressively with sharp cuts in
policy rates. To affect the yield curve over the medium run, central banks have made explicit
commitments to keep rates low for a significant period of time or engaged in purchases of
financial assets. Policy makers are also considering the benefits of developing additional
macroprudential instruments which can be used to respond to rapid credit growth and rising
asset prices. These new instruments should directly target the incentives to extend excessive
credit. But there are a number of practical questions to answer before they can be
implemented.
Charles Bean concludes that it is a mistake to look for a single culprit. Just as in Agatha
Christie’s Murder on the Orient Express, those with different motives but similar objectives
can all contribute to the same outcome. The economics profession was one of those culprits
and there are lessons for the discipline. It could incorporate psychology or behavioural
economics into the study of financial markets but this may be unnecessary since much of the
story can be explained using standard microeconomics. Economists should take more notice

BIS Review 101/2009

1

of history and not treat crises as pathologies that happen in other times or in other places but
as a central feature of free-market economies that models should aspire to explain. Finally,
macroeconomists have to learn how to put credit markets into their models in a meaningful
way and which enable us to model shocks originating in the financial sector rather than just
as an amplification mechanism.

The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction
The past twenty-four months have been tumultuous for the global economy, for economic
policy makers and, indeed, for the discipline of economics. Following a long period of
unusually good economic performance, characterised by relatively steady growth and low
and stable inflation in the advanced economies and rapid growth and development in key
emerging market economies, we have seen the eruption of a systemic financial crisis of quite
unusual intensity and international reach. The nearest precedent is probably the widespread
closing of international capital markets on the eve of the First World War. And associated
with that, we have seen the sharpest internationally synchronised slowdown in growth in the
post-war period, together with an unprecedented contraction in world trade.
To the public at large our present troubles are the fault of: whiz-kid financiers, who created
financial instruments that even they didn’t properly understand; greedy bankers, who
pursued profit and personal reward without regard to risk or common sense; somnolent
supervisors, who failed to adequately regulate and restrain those bankers; and negligent
central bankers, who allowed an explosion in liquidity, credit and asset prices that supported
the whole rotten edifice. And all the while, the culprits were cheered on by an economics
profession that was over-enamoured of theoretical models, blind to the lessons of history and
subject to a severe case of “group think”. Wasn’t it blindingly obvious that the whole house of
cards would come crashing down at some point?
As one of those involved in responding to the crisis – and some might charge also a bit part
in creating the conditions for it – I want to look this evening at how we got here. But rather
than giving a blow-by-blow account of events, I want instead to focus on what I see as the
key underlying economic forces. How could what appeared initially to be little more than an
over-extension of loans to a high-risk subset of US households end up generating total
financial sector losses in the advanced economies currently estimated by the IMF to be in the
region of $4.1 trillion and an output gap that is expected to reach nearly 6% of GDP in 2010?
And while there were a few Wise Owls 1 who saw trouble coming, why did most of the
profession fail to spot the dangers? Is that because we were locked into an inappropriate
paradigm? If so, is the time ripe for a Schumpeterian “gale of creative destruction” in the
subject?
The credit boom
Let me start by recalling a few facts regarding the credit boom that preceded the crisis.
During the decade preceding the crisis there was a substantial increase in the ratio of
household and business debt to GDP in a number of advanced economies, particularly the
United States, the United Kingdom and Spain; see the left-hand panel of Fig. 1. A striking
feature of this period was also the increased use of the credit markets by the financial sector
to fund its activities, rather than relying on the traditional medium of deposits; that is
illustrated in the right-hand panel for the United States.
This build up in debt accompanied a wave of financial innovation. There was a marked
expansion in the issuance of asset-backed securities: bundles of residential and commercial

1

2

Most notably Nouriel Roubini, Bob Shiller and Bill White and others at the BIS.

BIS Review 101/2009

mortgages, other consumer credit, and of loans to businesses that were sold on by the loan
originator, thus shifting the associated risks. And a new class of asset in the shape of
Collateralised Debt Obligations (CDOs) was created, which facilitated a further layer of
restructuring and redistribution of the risks in an asset-backed security. The extent to which
loans were moved off balance sheet through these means is shown in Fig. 2 (left-hand
panel). Finally, we saw a veritable explosion in the issuance of Credit Default Swaps (CDSs),
which allowed investors to hedge themselves against a wider range of default risks (righthand panel).
The picture that emerges from this is one of a more complex process of financial
intermediation, but one in which the innovation in contracts apparently allowed specific types
of risks to be split out, traded and redistributed towards those in a better position to bear
them. We thus seemed to be moving ever closer to an idealised Arrow-Debreu world of a full
set of state-contingent securities. Moreover, it seemed natural to think that the increased
dispersion of risk would make the financial system more, rather than less, stable, a view that
was certainly held by the former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan:
“These increasingly complex financial instruments have been especial
contributors, particularly over the past couple of stressful years, to the
development of a far more flexible, efficient, and resilient financial system than
existed just a quarter-century ago.” (Greenspan, 2002).
Accompanying this expansion in credit, there was also a rise in certain asset prices,
particularly that of housing, in those countries where credit rose most sharply (see Fig. 3).
But significantly, that explosion in credit was not associated with a marked expansion either
in the demand for goods and services, or in consumer price inflation. It is also notable that
the run-up in house prices in the United States was less marked than in the other
Anglophone countries and Spain. In part, that may reflect a more elastic response in the
construction of new houses in the United States.
The point to stress is that there was nothing self-evidently wrong with this expansion in
balance sheets and the associated rise in asset prices. There is some evidence from
developing economies that suggests that increased development in financial markets helps
to foster growth and catch-up. And if financial innovation allows households to gain access to
mortgage finance where they were previously unable to, one should expect that to lead to a
rise in the real price of houses. But just as there is evidence that increased financial
intermediation is often a Good Thing, so there is also evidence from numerous past
credit/asset price boom-bust episodes that a juxtaposition of rapid credit expansion and
sharp asset price increases is often a harbinger of a painful bust to come. So everything
hinges on whether the underlying developments are sustainable or not. The mistake of (most
of) the economics profession, along with many others, was a failure to see what was really
going on beneath the surface and to understand how disruptively things could unwind. But,
as I shall explain, I believe that the standard tools of economic analysis, far from being
proved redundant, can shed useful light on what went wrong.
Macroeconomic antecedents
The proximate causes of the present crisis undoubtedly lie within the financial markets. But it
is worth dwelling briefly on the macroeconomic environment in the years preceding the crisis,
which was conducive to the formation of what proved to be an unsustainable credit bubble.

BIS Review 101/2009

3

The Great Moderation
To begin with, this period was characterised by an unusually high degree of macroeconomic
stability, with steady growth and low and stable inflation in most of the advanced economies;
see for instance Fig. 4, which shows performance in the G5 countries before and after 1992 2 .
There are three broad explanations for this “Great Moderation”.
First, it could just have been a happy accident, if this was a period characterised by
unusually small, or a benign sequence of, shocks. In particular, access to a cheap source of
manufactured goods as result of the rapid development of China and other emerging market
economies created a terms of trade gain for the advanced countries and a beneficial
“tailwind”, which only mutated into a “headwind” towards the end of the period as rapid global
growth put upward pressure on oil and other commodity prices.
Second, changes in the structure of the economy could have meant that similar sized shocks
had smaller macroeconomic effects. Candidate structural changes included the shift from
manufacturing to services, tighter control of inventories leading to an attenuation of the
inventory cycle, increased competition in product and labour markets, and innovation in
financial markets that facilitated the greater spreading of risk and an enhanced ability to
smooth spending in the face of shocks to income or wealth.
A final possibility is that better macroeconomic policies, including improved policy
frameworks, had moved economies closer to the eponymous Taylor frontier which traces out
the lowest achievable inflation volatility for a given volatility of the output gap. In particular,
earlier periods were bedevilled by monetary policies that had failed to anchor inflation
expectations. But the pursuit of inflation targets and similar stability-oriented monetary
policies by independent central banks seemed to have been more successful in anchoring
inflation expectations.
Now if the Great Moderation was down to “good luck”, then improved macroeconomic
performance was more likely to be ephemeral. But if it was down to structural changes or
better policy, there was more chance of it proving permanent. Moreover, if it was permanent,
then part of the “dividend” from this reduced macroeconomic volatility should be a greater
willingness to take on risk.
As it happens, the academic literature has so far failed to provide a conclusive answer on the
relative contributions of the various explanations 3 . But what matters is how market
participants responded to these benign conditions. They are faced with what is, in essence, a
complex signal-extraction problem. But whereas many such problems in economics involve
learning about first moments of a distribution, this involves making inferences about higher
moments. The longer such a period of low volatility lasts, the more reasonable it is to assume
that it is permanent. But as tail events are necessarily rarely observed, there is always going
to be a danger of underestimating tail risks.
Certainly it appears from measures of volatility implied from options prices for US equities
(VIX) and treasuries (MOVE) that the perceived risks in financial markets had shrunk to
extremely low levels by 2006; see Fig. 5. There are two ways of rationalising this. One
possibility is straightforward extrapolation into the future of the benign experience of the
preceding few years. An alternative and complementary explanation is excessive faith in the

2

The Great Moderation appears to have started rather earlier, in the mid-1980s, in the United States.

3

In part, that is because shocks are not measured directly, only their consequences; so what appears to be
‘good luck’, may reflect the beneficial influence of structural changes or better policy in ameliorating their
impact; see Bernanke (2004). Other contributions to this literature include: Cogley and Sargent (2005), Sims
and Zha (2006), and Stock and Watson (2003), who ascribe a sizeable portion of the improved performance to
good luck; and Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2000) and Lubik and Schorfheide (2004), who put more weight on
better policies.

4

BIS Review 101/2009

ability of policy makers to maintain steady growth in the real economy. The Fed’s reluctance
to use interest rates to lean against asset price booms coupled with a willingness to relax
monetary policy aggressively in the wake of sharp asset price falls (Greenspan, 2002) may
also have helped place a floor under expected asset prices (the “Greenspan Put”; see Miller,
Weller and Zhang, 2002).
A tendency of people to underestimate future risks during periods of good economic
performance seems to be a recurring theme in the history of financial markets. In part this
seems to be a mixture of a willingness or desire to believe that the world has changed for the
better, and moreover to find ways to rationalise that belief – in other words, “this time it’s
different”. To that must be coupled a limited imagination – shared in this instance with
regulators and central bankers – to see quite how badly things could go wrong. But when
market participants can claim, as David Viniar, the Chief Financial Officer of Goldman Sachs,
did in August 2007 that they “were seeing things that were 25-standard deviation moves,
several days in a row” it is a sign that something must be badly wrong 4 . Wrong, that is, not
with the world, but rather with market participants’ estimation of risk.
A particular feature of this underestimation of risk lay in the prevalent assumption that bad
shocks were likely to be uncorrelated with each other. Thus the management of Northern
Rock probably believed that if they were unable to roll over their short-term wholesale
funding in the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper market, then they would always be able to
find an alternative source of funds in the inter-bank market. But as it transpired, the same
forces that led to a shutting down of the former in August 2007 also led to the closure of the
latter at all but very short maturities. By the same token, many investors thought they had
purchased relatively safe securities because there were insured against default by the
monolines or through the purchase of CDS contracts. But that insurance proved worthless
when large correlated losses occurred and the insurers proved to have insufficiently deep
pockets. A systemic financial crisis is apt to generate dysfunctions in multiple markets
simultaneously, making bad tail outcomes much more likely to occur than they appear when
risks are treated as largely independent. And joint distributions with independence in the
central mass but high correlation in the tails are likely to be extremely hard to model and
calibrate.
Monetary policy
Other macroeconomic features also probably contributed to the growth in credit leading up to
the crisis. In particular, according to some monetary policy was too loose over this period,
especially in the United States (see Taylor, 2007). Fig. 6 shows the difference between the
policy rate and benchmark estimates of an “appropriate” policy rate derived from a Taylor
rule. Notwithstanding the usual caveats about the construction of such benchmarks, the very
low level of the Federal Funds rate relative to the Taylor rule during 2001-5 is striking. Of
course, the FOMC held rates this low for a reason – they were concerned about entering a
Japanese-style deflation and in order to mitigate that risk committed to holding the policy rate
at a low level for a sustained period so as to pull down longer-term market interest rates.
There is, though, little to suggest that policy rates were noticeably out of line in the euro area
and the United Kingdom. Credit was nevertheless growing rapidly, as documented earlier in
Fig. 1. Despite generally low and stable inflation, that led some – most notably Bill White and
colleagues at the Bank for International Settlements (Borio and White, 2003; White 2006) –
to argue that the credit/asset-price boom was storing up trouble for the future. Accordingly,
they argued that central banks should actively “lean against the wind” to mitigate these risks,

4

Dowd, Cotter, Humphrey and Woods (2008) calculate that, with a normal distribution, a 25-sigma daily event
should occur about once in every 1.31 x 10135 years; to put this in context, the universe is estimated to be just
12-14 billion years old!

BIS Review 101/2009

5

even though inflation objectives did not appear to be under threat. Others, including the
present and former Chairmen of the Federal Reserve, took the view that diagnosing a
misaligned asset price was only possible in retrospect and that only a large increase in policy
rates could stop such a boom, which risked creating exactly the shock to the real economy
that one wanted to avoid (see Bean, 2003, and the references therein). I shall return to this
issue at the end of this lecture.
Global imbalances
Another feature of potential importance is the counterintuitive pattern of international capital
flows. The rapid development and integration into the global market economy of China, India,
Brazil and other emerging market economies could have been expected to lead to capital
flows from the advanced countries into these economies in order to provide the investment to
equip the extra workers being brought on to the global labour market. But instead we saw
China exporting capital and the United States and the United Kingdom importing it; see Fig.
7. In 2007, for instance, the US current account deficit stood at $730 billion, while China’s
surplus stood at no less than $372 billion. Moreover, the deficits are also large in historical
terms.
A number of competing explanations have been advanced for this pattern of flows. First, it
could simply reflect the juxtaposition of strong demand in the United States, coupled with
China’s adoption of an undervalued exchange rate in order to accelerate the development of
the traded goods sector and to soak up labour from the rural areas (Dooley, Folkerts-Landau
and Garber, 2004). Second, it could reflect a “savings glut” in the surplus countries
(Bernanke, 2005), resulting from a lack of an adequate household safety net in China, the
accumulation of precautionary holdings of international reserves by several emerging market
countries after the Asia crisis, and rational savings of the windfall gains from higher oil prices
on the part of oil producers. Finally, it has been suggested that the United States holds a
comparative advantage in the creation of “high quality” financial assets from real
investments, leading to a direction of savings into the US financial markets (Caballero, Farhi
and Gourinchas, 2008).
Now while these flows are certainly likely to have added to the growth in credit, on the face of
it they could only be a part of the explanation. For instance, the cumulative US current
account deficit over the 2000-7 period was $4.7 trillion. Over the same period, the stock of
household, corporate and government debt outstanding rose by $14.4 trillion, more than
three times as much. But it is possible that the global imbalances may have played into the
credit boom through another route. Bernanke’s “savings glut” hypothesis was advanced
primarily as an explanation for the decline in long-term real interest rates seen during this
decade; see Fig. 8. And that low level of real returns on government bonds may in turn have
encouraged financial institutions to shift into other, riskier, assets that offered a higher return,
such as the burgeoning class of asset-backed securities – what came to be known as the
“search for yield”.
There is not a lot of research yet that sheds light one way or the other on the role of the
global imbalances in the credit/asset-price boom. There is quite a strong correlation across
countries between house price inflation and current account deficits (Fig. 9), but this says
nothing about causality, which plausibly could also run from house prices, via demand, to the
current account. In fact, Granger-causality tests point to bi-directional causality, running from
both current accounts to house prices and vice versa 5 . That is consistent with an influence of

5

6

With four lags of each variable on the right-hand side and a full set of time and country fixed effect dummies
for sixteen countries over the period 1975-2007, the F-statistic for the exclusion of house prices in the
equation for the current account is 8.2, while the F-statistic for the exclusion of the current account in the
house price equation is 4.2.

BIS Review 101/2009

the imbalances on asset prices. But equally the results could just indicate that both variables
are affected by the state of the business cycle.
What went wrong?
While the macroeconomic environment may have provided fertile ground for the credit/asset
price boom to develop, to explain both the extent of the growth in credit and the magnitude of
the subsequent crisis one needs to dig down into what was happening inside financial
markets. And when one does that, one finds a variety of incentive distortions and information
problems that appear to have played a central role.
Distorted incentives
Banks are vulnerable institutions because they make long-term loans with uncertain returns
that are financed predominantly by short-term debt instruments and callable deposits. If
creditors think that the borrowers will be unable to repay the loans, then there is every
incentive for them to run. That is why banks are required to hold a buffer of capital and
reserves large enough to absorb losses in most feasible states of nature.
Consider for a moment a very simple financial intermediary (a “bank”) that can finance risky
lending with either debt, which here encompasses both deposits and credit market
instruments, or equity. Assume that the bank pays RD on its debt and earns (a stochastic) RL
on its loans, net of intermediation and monitoring costs. Then the return on its capital, RK, is
given by:
RK = (1+λ)RL – λRD,
where λ is the leverage (debt-to-equity) ratio. In the normal course of events, one would
expect the return on debt to be an increasing function of leverage, as the greater the
leverage, the greater the chance that the bank’s capital will be wiped out in the event of low
returns on the loans and they will be forced to default on part or all of the debt. Indeed, with
symmetric information between bank and creditor, there should be no gain from raising
leverage at all by virtue of the Modigliani-Miller theorem.
For a number of reasons, however, this may not work in practice. Creditors – especially if
they are households rather than sophisticated financial market participants – may not even
factor in the implications of higher leverage for the possibility of default. And even if they do,
the debt may be partially or wholly underwritten by the state, with the cost of the insurance
only imperfectly passed back to the bank. Similarly, the bank may be thought to be too
important to be allowed to fail, in which case people might expect an injection of capital by
the state to make good abnormal losses. In any of these cases, there is an incentive for the
bank to raise leverage. Moreover, the lower is the perceived uncertainty associated with the
loans, the more the bank can afford to leverage up, while maintaining the same uncertainty
over the return on its capital. So the environment of the Great Moderation would have been
particularly conducive to intermediaries increasing the leverage of their positions.
The incentive distortions here are intrinsic to the process of financial intermediation. The next
set of distortions is more specific to the present conjuncture and relates to securitisation.
Securitisation is attractive because selling on the loans and the attendant risks enables a
bank to leverage more loans off its capital. And, as noted earlier, such distribution of risks
should in principle be beneficial for the economy.
Unfortunately, it transpired that this model, or at least its application in the past few years,
suffered from a number of incentive problems. First, there is the obvious one that if a loan
originator can sell a loan on at par, then he has less incentive to take care who he lends to.
The much higher default rates on cohorts of US sub-prime loans originated in 2006 and 2007
compared with earlier years is indicative of the consequences of this lack of incentive (see

BIS Review 101/2009

7

Fig. 10). The originator needs to have enough “skin in the game” if he is going to exercise
due diligence in loan origination – and having a reputation at stake may not always suffice.
Second, the crisis revealed that many of the risks that securitisation was supposed to
distribute more widely had in fact remained either within the banking system, or else could be
re-intermediated back into it. Thus, the debt securities issued by one bank were not sold on
to investors outside the banking system, but were instead bought by the proprietary trading
desks of other banks, leading to a network of cross-holdings of the underlying loans. That
may make sense when the main risks are idiosyncratic to the loans originated by particular
banks, but looks rather foolish when the risks are macroeconomic in nature and the returns
on all such securities are correlated.
Moreover, a considerable amount of the remaining risk was contained in institutions which,
while not formally recognised as banks, engaged in exactly the same sort of maturity
transformation, financing long-term assets by short-term debt instruments. These included
entities such as conduits, which housed the securitised loans and then financed them by
selling short-term paper. But in many cases these entities had back-up credit lines to the
supporting bank, so that when funding difficulties arose, the securitised loans in effect came
back onto the bank’s balance sheet. And even where there was no formal obligation to act as
a lender of last resort, originators often chose to provide back-up finance in order to protect
their name in funding markets.
The motive for setting up these off-balance-sheet entities was entirely one of regulatory
arbitrage. Off-balance-sheet vehicles were not required to hold capital in the same way as a
bank would if the loans were on their balance sheet. So it appeared to be a neat way to
boost profits without having to raise more capital. The Banco d’España, the Spanish banking
supervisor, insisted that Spanish banks would have to treat conduits and the like as on
balance sheet for capital purposes. As a result, Spain did not see the mushrooming of these
off-balance-sheet vehicles.
A third distortion lies in the nature of remuneration contracts. Incentive contracts that offer
potentially unlimited upside rewards, but cap the downside losses, encourage traders to take
on excessive risk. One unintended consequence of financial innovation was that it enabled
clever traders to create positions with considerable embedded leverage – that is, portfolios
requiring little payment up front, but whose returns amplified changes in the value of the
underlying assets. Traders then had a natural incentive to gravitate towards these types of
highly risky instruments.
A related problem is that it is extremely difficult for management to observe the risk being
taken on by their traders, particularly when innovative financial instruments have unusual
return distributions. Take, for example, a deeply out of the money option. This pays a steady
income premium and has little variation in value when the underlying instrument is a long
way from the strike price, but generates rapidly escalating losses in bad states of the world.
In good times this looks like a high return, low risk instrument. Only in very bad states of the
world do the true risks taken on become apparent.
Information problems
Information problems have also been central to the crisis. Most of the asset-backed
securities that have proved toxic are far from simple. A plain vanilla Residential Mortgage
Backed Security (RMBS) typically contains tens or hundreds of thousands of underlying
mortgages and even the documentation on them can run to a couple of hundred pages.
These instruments provide diversification, but unless the mortgages are fairly homogenous in
nature, it will be difficult for an individual investor to monitor the evolution of the underlying
risk exposures at all precisely. The problem is compounded when the pool of mortgages is
continually topped up to replace maturing mortgages, as is the case with Master Trusts, as
the characteristics of newer cohorts may differ from those of older cohorts.

8

BIS Review 101/2009

In addition, US RMBS contain embedded options that further complicates the evaluation of
their worth. Ordinary US mortgage loans are usually non-recourse and offer the borrower the
option of both early repayment and of default if the price of the house falls below the value of
the loan, leaving the lender to recover what they can from re-sale of the house at what will be
an uncertain price. US sub-prime mortgages also embed an option for the lender. Essentially
sub-prime mortgages are structured as a rolling sequence of short-term loans, with the
lender sharing in some of the increase in housing equity when house prices rise and having
discretion over whether to offer a new and affordable loan depending on whether house
prices have risen or not (see Gorton, 2008, for further details). As a consequence of these
embedded options, RMBS, particularly of sub-prime mortgages, have a rather complex payoff structure that is tricky to price and difficult to monitor.
CDOs are yet more complex. These re-package the payoffs in bundles of asset-backed
securities into an ordered hierarchy of other securities, with each tranche only bearing losses
once tranches above it have been wiped out. A bundle of risky assets could thus be repackaged into other assets, some of which offered bond-like returns suitable for investors
such as pension funds seeking low-risk assets, while the tranches bearing more risk would
be sold to those willing to carry more risk 6 . But the pay-offs to these assets are highly nonlinear in the underlying risks (see Fig. 11). As a consequence the prices are apt to drop
sharply with changing perceptions of the underlying default rates, a feature that has been
apparent during the crisis.
A typical CDO comprises a large number and variety of RMBS, including a mix of prime and
sub-prime mortgages from a variety of originators. On the face of it, this might seem like a
good thing as it creates diversification. However, even more than with plain vanilla RMBS, it
becomes impossible to monitor the evolution of the underlying risks – it is akin to trying to
unpick the ingredients of a sausage. That may not matter too much when defaults are low
and only the holders of the first, equity, tranche suffer any losses. Holders of the safer
tranches can in that case sit back and relax – a case of rational inattention. But once defaults
begin to rise materially, it matters a lot what such a security contains. And with highly nonlinear payoffs, returns can be extremely sensitive to small changes in underlying conditions.
When defaults on some US sub-prime mortgages originated in 2006 and 2007 started
turning out much higher than expected, there was a realisation that losses could be much
greater on some of these securities than previously believed. And a growing realisation of the
informational complexity of these securities made them difficult to price in an objective sense.
Essentially, investors switched from believing that returns behaved according to a tight and
well-behaved distribution to one in which they had very little idea about the likely distribution
of returns – a state of virtual Knightian uncertainty (Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2008).
There was also a higher-order information problem arising out of the interconnected nature of
the financial system. Banks, when they appear at all in economic models, just exist to
transfer funds from savers to borrowers and to monitor the latter. But the reality is a high
degree of exposure of financial institutions to each other as a result of interbank loans,
holdings of CDSs written by other parties, holdings of securities issued by other parties, and
so on. In normal times, one does not need to know much about a counterparties’ risk
exposure. But when there are doubts about solvency of a major institution, one needs to
know not only one’s own exposure to that institution, but also about the exposure of one’s
other counterparties.
The collapse of Lehman Brothers was particularly critical in that, prior to that and particularly
in the light of the rescue of Bear Stearns, such an institution was probably viewed as being
too big and interconnected to fail. But the failure of the US authorities to put together a viable
rescue plan, together with growing doubts about the likely effectiveness of the Troubled

6

As it turned out, those willing to carry the risk were not always those best placed to bear it.

BIS Review 101/2009

9

Asset Relief Program (see Taylor, 2009), raised the possibility in investors’ minds of the
failure of a whole range of institutions that had previously been considered safe. That is
evidenced in the simultaneous sharp spike upwards in the CDS spreads of a number of
financial institutions after the collapse of Lehman’s (see Fig. 12). Moreover, the prospect of
having to make significant default pay outs called into question the solvency of a key provider
of that insurance, AIG.
The bottom line of all this is that the information requirements for managing risk escalated
rapidly at the same time as investors were waking up to the realisation that the distribution of
prospective returns on a range of asset-backed securities was a great deal worse than they
thought. Not surprisingly, there was a rush for the exits and a drying up of wholesale funding
to institutions that were thought to be at all vulnerable. Moreover, attempts to cope with that
by selling off assets ran into an adverse selection problem: if someone is selling an asset,
then perhaps that indicates that they know it’s a “lemon”. And even the revelation of central
bank support in its role as Lender of Last Resort, far from solving the problem, could be
interpreted as a negative signal about an institution, as was so in the case of Northern Rock,
for example.
As a result, at times, such as during the “Little Panic” of August 2007, as well as the “Great
Panic” of September-October 2008, the markets for a whole range of asset-backed securities
closed completely and investors sought safety in liquid government assets. These pressures
are reflected in the spread between measures of bank funding costs and equivalent maturity
government debt (Fig. 13). Even when confidence has appeared to be improving, the
markets for asset-backed securities have remained dysfunctional.
Amplification and propagation
While these incentive distortions and information problems help to explain why the crisis
happened, they don’t explain why its impact has been so great. Back in 2007, the US
Federal Reserve estimated the unexpected losses associated with the sub-prime mortgage
market would be of the order of $50 billion 7 . Since then, the IMF have progressively raised
their estimate of the write-downs on US-originated assets to $2.7 trillion (see Fig. 14), while
their current estimate for write-downs across the United States, Europe and Japan stands at
$4.1 trillion. Alongside that we are witnessing a sharp and internationally synchronised
slowdown in global growth that will probably turn out to have been the sharpest in the postwar period, together with an unprecedented contraction in world trade (Fig. 15). The shortfall
in advanced country GDP, relative to potential, alone is projected by the Fund to reach
around $2.2 trillion by 2010. How could this come about?
The first thing to be said is that much more was involved than the imprudent extension of
loans to a few poor US households. Rather, the unexpected losses on sub-prime mortgages
and assets backed by them acted as a trigger for generalised doubts about the viability of a
whole class of assets and a general reappraisal of risk premia, which had become unduly
compressed at the tail end of the Great Moderation period. So the fundamental shock was a
much larger one.
But a number of amplification and propagation mechanisms also appear to have kicked in.
Some of these positive feedback loops 8 have operated entirely within the financial sector.
The most obvious is that the withdrawal of funding and/or the need to maintain adequate

7

Testimony by Ben Bernanke to the US Senate Banking Committee, 19 July 2007.

8

Numerous official-sector papers have insisted on referring to such mechanisms as negative feedback loops,
because they generate a larger adverse impact on asset prices or the real economy from the original negative
shock. But since they are amplifying, rather than stabilising, feedback loops, they should obviously be referred
to as positive feedback loops.

10

BIS Review 101/2009

capital ratios prompted fire sales of assets. But if there is great uncertainty about the
fundamental value of an asset or there is a suspicion that the seller may have chosen to sell
it because they know it is a lemon, then prices are likely to have to fall a long way before
buyers step forward. That is particularly so if potential buyers are concerned about their own
access to funding and therefore wish to remain in safe and liquid assets. But given the use of
mark-to-market accounting to value trading books, the falls in asset prices then worsens the
balance sheets of other institutions. That in turn reduces their capital ratios, aggravating their
problems in raising funds and generating a further round of asset sales.
Further amplifying mechanisms arise as a consequence of leveraged positions. The net
worth of a leveraged investor deteriorates much faster than his gross worth when asset
prices fall, as all of the loss is scored against capital. Thus even to hold leverage constant
requires substantial asset sales, further depressing asset prices. For instance, an investor
with $100 million of assets financed by $10 million of capital and $90 million of debt who
experiences a $5 million loss in asset value would have to sell $45 million of assets and
redeem an equivalent amount of the debt to restore his original leverage ratio. Brunnermeier
(2009) refers to this as a “loss spiral”. In fact, things are even worse than this because
lenders typically expect borrowers to fund a larger fraction of an investment themselves in
such circumstances, reinforcing the downward spiral. And Adrian and Shin (2008) indeed
find that the leverage ratio of the five US large investment banks, which held a substantial
quantity of the securitised loans, was indeed strongly correlated with the size of their balance
sheets.
Now I noted earlier that once counterparty risk becomes a material concern, it is not only the
state of an intermediary’s immediate counterparties’ balance sheets that matter, but also the
state of those counterparties’ counterparties balance sheets, and so on. In practice, what
used to be a very simple process of intermediating funds between savers and borrowers has
evolved into a highly complex network, which is both difficult to comprehend and a major
source of uncertainty. This complexity of the financial network is illustrated in Figs. 16 and
17, in which the size of the nodes is proportional to the size of the balance sheet and the
thickness of the external lines measures the sum of the bilateral exposures. Fig. 16 shows
the network for the major players in the UK financial system, while Fig. 17 shows a
corresponding map for the international financial system.
In the first instance, any losses that arise will be scored against an institution’s capital. But
when it reaches the point of default, the losses cascade through the network until they reach
intermediaries with enough capital to absorb them. And default itself amplifies losses in the
network, most obviously through direct bankruptcy costs, but also through fire sales of the
sort already discussed. Moreover, when entities are highly leveraged, they will have only
limited capacity to absorb losses, making such a cascade of defaults more prone to occur. A
similar network dynamic can occur when institutions are hit by a payment shock, such as the
drying up of wholesale funding that occurred at the start of the crisis and again around the
time of the collapse of Lehman’s.
The analysis of the behaviour of such financial networks is still very much in its infancy 9 . But
a key point material to regulatory design is that some types of network will be inherently more
stable than others, depending on both the nature of the network and the obligations on its
members. For instance, a network where all institutions are of similar importance and
exposures are evenly spread is likely to be relatively stable, as the consequences of an
adverse shock to any one institution will be spread widely and thinly. In contrast, as we saw
with the collapse of Lehman’s, networks in which there are a relatively small number of key
players are potentially very susceptible to the failure of a key player. By the same token, a
network in which exposures are collateralised or can be netted across the system will be

9

For more discussion of this issue, see Haldane (2009).

BIS Review 101/2009

11

more stable than one where gross exposures are forfeited in the event of default, as in the
latter case the cascade through the network of the losses is likely to generate more failures
on the way.
All the discussion thus far relates to amplification within the financial sector. But what about
the substantial impact on the real economy? The IMF’s estimate of total financial sector
write-downs in the advanced economies since the start of the crisis is around $4 trillion. If we
assume an annual marginal propensity to consume out of wealth of 5%, that suggests a fall
in demand of around $200 billion. But the loss in advanced country GDP relative to potential
is projected to be more than 10 times bigger than that. So we cannot come near to explaining
the “Great Contraction” purely in terms of wealth effects.
The most obvious additional mechanism for the propagation of the financial crisis into the
real economy is through a “credit crunch” as banks tighten lending standards and with it the
supply of credit to businesses and households. That could arise both because lenders
correctly realise that they were under-pricing risk and because of a need for them to deleverage. Both the bank lending data and credit conditions surveys in the US, UK and euro
area are consistent with some restriction in the supply of credit from the middle of 2007
onwards. But there was little evidence of an additional very sharp tightening in the supply of
credit last autumn that could explain the sharp fall in activity in the six to nine months after
the collapse of Lehman’s in 2008Q4 and 2009Q1.
There are two candidate, and mutually inclusive, explanations for the large impact on output.
Expectations of future credit availability may have worsened sharply. Or, more plausibly,
there may have been a more general increase in uncertainty as a result of the nearmeltdown in the financial sector, leading to an increase in precautionary savings, the
postponement of planned investment projects and a running down of inventories. But either
way, globalised supply chains ensured that the shock to demand was transmitted worldwide.
History suggests that downturns associated with financial crises tend to be both deeper and
longer-lasting than average. Reinhart and Rogoff (2008, 2009) have mapped the
macroeconomic characteristics of the present financial crisis against preceding episodes in
both advanced and emerging market economies. Their results can be summarised as
follows: asset price collapses tend to be deep and prolonged; the aftermath of banking crises
tend to be associated with substantial and prolonged falls in output; the downturns typically
lead to a substantial build-up in public debt; and the antecedents of the present crisis appear
remarkably similar to those in previous episodes. Fig. 18 documents some similar results
from a recent IMF (2008) exercise, showing that the cumulative output loss in outright
recessions, as well as in milder slowdowns, on average tends to be almost twice as much if
preceded by a financial crisis. The results of Furceri and Mourougane (2009) suggest,
moreover, that part of this output loss is permanent; they find that the typical OECD financial
crisis knocks around 2% off potential output, which rises to 4% for deep crises.
These findings suggest that financial crises can have a material impact on both the dynamics
of the business cycle and on the underlying equilibrium growth path. The literature on the
“broad credit channel” and the “financial accelerator” points to an amplifying effect of
changes in firms’ financial health on their cost of capital. In particular, when borrowers have
less collateral they face a higher external finance premium to compensate lenders for the
increased monitoring costs (see e.g. Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist, 1999). But the
quantitative magnitude of the effect in this type of model is usually relatively modest. And the
banks in this class of model are simple or non-existent, and any incentive or information
problems relate to the borrower, rather than the financial intermediary.
Instead, it seems likely that the adequacy of bank capital and the associated phenomenon of
financial sector de-leveraging are likely to play a central role. Capital is essential because it
is the means by which intermediaries persuade creditors that they will almost surely get their
money back. Increasing capital is one way to get leverage down; that is why governments in
the US and other affected countries forced banks to raise more capital privately or else

12

BIS Review 101/2009

accept injections of extra capital financed by the taxpayer. Extending guarantees on funding,
whether retail or wholesale, is another way to make creditors believe that they will get their
money back, as are measures to insure or quarantine the risky bad assets.
An open question is therefore whether the banking system will be able to support an
adequate volume of credit as the extensive network of public support is removed. If not, then
further attempts to de-leverage are possible. And de-leveraging through the restriction of new
loans generates a positive feedback loop analogous to that through asset sales. Deleveraging by restricting credit growth may be privately rational, but if every intermediary tries
to do the same, the result will be lower activity and higher defaults and little improvement in
leverage ratios – what, to paraphrase Keynes, we might describe as the “paradox of deleveraging”. A recent insightful contribution from Gertler and Karadi (2009) explicitly captures
the role that de-leveraging can play in slowing a recovery when financial intermediaries need
to hold capital in order to convince creditors that they will be repaid.
Policy: cure and prevention
The severity of the financial crisis and the sharpness of the contraction in activity have
prompted an aggressive response by policy makers. I have already mentioned the measures
taken to support the banking system directly. Lack of time prevents me expanding further on
that topic. But it would be remiss if I did not say a few words about the response of central
banks.
The first action has been to offer extensive liquidity support, particularly after the
intensification of the crisis in the wake of the collapse of Lehman’s. Following Bagehot, the
classic guide for central banks in the face of a financial crisis is to lend freely against good
collateral at a penalty rate. Although the details of the operations differ, the central banks in
each of the main jurisdictions have followed that guide, widening both the range of the
collateral that are prepared to lend against and extending the tenor of the loans. In the United
States, because of the critical importance of non-bank financial intermediaries to the US
economy, the Federal Reserve has also extended the range of counterparties that it is
prepared to deal with. As a result, the balance sheets of central banks have mushroomed
(see Fig. 19).
All of the key central banks have also cut their policy rates aggressively, so that both policy
rates and short-term market rates are close to their effective floor of zero. Before the crisis
erupted, and with policy rates averaging somewhere in the 4-5% range, most central bankers
would have thought they had plenty of room for manoeuvre to offset adverse demand shocks
by cutting policy rates. But the transmission mechanism of monetary policy is weakened
when the financial system is trying to de-leverage. Hence central banks have found
themselves needing to inject even more stimulus, taking them into unknown territory.
There are two primary options 10 confronting a central bank that has reached the zero interest
rate lower bound, both of which seek to influence a wider range of asset prices. The first is to
provide a commitment to keep the policy rate low for a significant period into the future. This
approach had already been followed by the Federal Reserve earlier in decade, when it set
interest rates much lower than suggested by a Taylor rule. At the present juncture, the
Federal Reserve, the Bank of Canada and the Riksbank have all made explicit statements
that imply policy rates will remain low.
The idea behind providing such commitments is that they both pull down market interest
rates further out along the yield curve and raise expected future inflation. Indeed, in the
canonical New Keynesian/New Classical DSGE model, this is the only way of stimulating the

10

King (1999) and Buiter and Panigirtzoglou (1999) discuss these and other more exotic approaches.

BIS Review 101/2009

13

economy at the zero interest rate lower bound, as the impact of monetary policy is
completely summarised by the current and future path of the policy rate. A variation on this
theme, in essence adopted by the European Central Bank, is to provide unlimited financing
to the banking system at the policy rate at longer maturities than usual.
The other option involves the outright purchases of assets, rather than the normal
repurchase agreements (i.e. collateralised lending) undertaken by central banks. This may
involve the purchase of either government debt or a range of corporate assets. And they may
be financed by the issuance of extra central bank reserves, raising the monetary base. Or
they may be financed by the sale of other assets in which case there will be no effect on the
monetary base. The Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have bought both
government and private assets, though with different emphases, in part reflecting the
different financial market structures. In particular, the Federal Reserve has bought significant
quantities of a variety of corporate assets, whereas the Bank’s purchases have been more
heavily concentrated on purchases of government debt.
The aim of purchases of corporate assets is to enhance market liquidity by having the central
bank stand ready to act as a backstop buyer. In so doing, it should bring down spreads over
government bond yields by reducing liquidity premia, encourage issuance and generally
improve the functioning of capital markets. Importantly, the central bank may not need to
make a large volume of purchases to make a difference. The mere fact of credibly standing
ready to buy may be enough to have the desired impact. However, the central bank will be
taking private credit risk onto its balance sheet, potentially exposing itself – and indirectly the
taxpayer – to the risk of credit losses. So ultimately, this may be better thought of as a fiscal
action.
Purchases of government debt are instead intended to have a more general impact by
pushing down bond yields. That, in turn, can be expected to push up a whole range of asset
prices as the sellers subsequently re-balance their portfolios. Rather than being considered
unconventional, purchases of government debt financed by the issuance of extra central
bank money is really just a return to the classic monetary policy operation of the textbook: an
open market operation. The only things that distinguish the present operations from a
traditional open market operation are the circumstances under which they are taking place
and their scale.
The mechanism whereby asset purchases are supposed to influence the economy are
absent in the canonical New Keynesian/New Classical macroeconomic model, because of
the assumption that the returns on interest-bearing assets all move in tandem and that any
risk or term premia are constant. The rationale for asset purchases – that relative asset
supplies affect asset prices and returns – instead lies in an older strand of the literature,
dating back to Tobin (1969) and Brunner and Meltzer (1972) 11 . Under normal circumstances,
when the asset purchases are financed by the issuance of additional central bank money,
one would also expect the increase in commercial bank reserves to lead to increased
lending. However, when banks are trying to de-leverage, such additional reserves are more
likely to be hoarded. That appears to be what happened during the Japanese experiment
with quantitative easing in the early part of this decade and a similar response is to be
expected from banks at the current juncture.
The initial responses in the United Kingdom to these measures have been moderately
encouraging. Government bond yields fell significantly on the commencement of the
programme of asset purchases, and yields appear to be some 50-75 basis points lower than
they would otherwise be. And there are also signs of beneficial effects on conditions in the
relevant corporate credit markets. Meier (2009) provides a fuller assessment. But it is very
early to draw conclusions on the efficacy of these measures, as the transmission lags

11

14

Andres, Lopez-Salido and Nelson (2004) is a rare recent contributions in this tradition.

BIS Review 101/2009

through to nominal spending are likely to be quite long. Moreover, even in some years time, it
will still be difficult to draw firm conclusions, as the counterfactual is bound to be uncertain.
But it will certainly provide fertile ground for future PhD theses.
Let me turn now to the lessons from the crisis regarding the conduct of monetary policy in the
future. In the run-up to the crisis, there was a lively debate regarding the right way to respond
to rapid credit growth and rising asset prices. On the one hand, economists at the Bank for
International Settlements and others (e.g. Borio and White, 2003; Cecchetti, Genberg and
Wadhwani, 2002) advocated “leaning against the wind” by raising interest rates above that
apparently warranted by inflation and activity. On the other hand, the Federal Reserve
espoused a policy of “benign neglect” coupled with aggressive relaxation in the event that
asset prices fell sharply (see e.g. Greenspan, 2002; Bernanke and Gertler, 2001) on the
grounds that identifying an asset price bubble in its early stages was difficult and trying to
deflate an established one was dangerous.
The events of the past couple of years have clearly tipped the balance in favour of taking
pre-emptive action. And in a second-best world, where monetary policy is the only instrument
available to cool a credit/asset-price boom, then that may well make sense. Indeed, an
inflation-targeting central bank ought to be willing to undershoot its target in the medium
term, if it thereby improves its chance of meeting the target further out through the avoidance
of a disruptive bust (Bean, 2003). But monetary policy is a blunt weapon for this purpose,
and raising interest rates enough to cool a credit/asset-price boom that is in full swing is likely
to involve substantial collateral damage to real activity.
Instead, with an additional objective in the shape of credit growth/asset prices one really
needs another instrument that has a stronger and more direct impact on credit growth and
asset price inflation than monetary policy. That is what so-called “macro-prudential
regulation” is supposed to achieve.
Most discussion in policy circles has so far revolved around introducing pro-cyclical capital
requirements, or its close cousin dynamic provisioning. Thus banks would be required to
build up extra capital/reserves during a credit/asset-price boom that can then be run down in
the event of a bust. This should reduce the incentive for banks to leverage up in a boom, as
well as making the financial system more robust in a bust. However, other instruments could
also be deployed to this end. For instance, credit/asset-price booms seem to be
characterised by an excessive shift into riskier forms of lending. In that case, an instrument
more directly targeted at the microeconomic distortion would be to increase the risk-weights
that are attached to such lending when computing banks' required capital. And, as we have
seen in the present crisis, a lot of the action has taken place outside banks' balance sheets.
In that case, varying margin requirements might be a more appropriate instrument for dealing
with vulnerabilities building up in the capital markets more generally. The best approach is
likely to involve a portfolio of instruments.
Once the instruments have been identified, a host of other questions then need to be
addressed. Precisely which variables should the instruments vary with and how are the
variations supposed to be calibrated? And once that has been answered, policy makers need
to understand both the macroeconomic impact of the instruments and how their operation
interacts with monetary and fiscal policies.
Everything I have said so far about macro-prudential regulation has been couched in terms
of moderating the impact of the credit cycle over time. But the earlier discussion of network
effects highlighted the potential role played by large and highly interconnected financial
intermediaries, graphically illustrated in the aftermath of the collapse of Lehman's. That
points to another role for macro-prudential regulation, namely to increase the robustness of
the financial system by requiring systemically important intermediaries to carry heavier
capital requirements. So the cross-section dimension adds another set of instrument design
issues.

BIS Review 101/2009

15

Some lessons for the discipline
Let me conclude with some observations regarding the implications of the crisis for the future
development of our subject. In all probability, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction of
2008 will join the Great Depression of the 1930s and the Great Inflation of the 1970s as
discipline-defining events. The struggle to understand and deal with the Great Depression
led to the invention of macroeconomics as a distinct branch of the subject. In the case of the
Great Inflation, economic theory for once led events, with the development of the natural rate
hypothesis foreshadowing the subsequent take-off in inflation. But the subsequent decades
were spent with refining our understanding of the inflationary process. What will be the
legacy of the Great Panic and the Great Contraction?
First, in my view it would be a mistake to look for a single guilty culprit. Underestimation of
risk born of the Great Moderation, loose monetary policy in the United States and a perverse
pattern of international capital flows together provided fertile territory for the emergence of a
credit/asset-price bubble. The creation of an array of complex new assets that were
supposed to spread risk more widely ended up destroying information about the scale and
location of losses, which proved to be crucial when the market turned. And an array of
distorted incentives led the financial system to build up excessive leverage, increasing the
vulnerabilities when asset prices began to fall. As in Agatha Christie's Murder on the Orient
Express, everyone had a hand in it.
Second, the economics profession has oversold the virtues of unfettered financial markets.
We usually start from a presumption that markets work best when they are left to
themselves, unless there are obvious market failures present. By the same token, even
though not strictly the case in theory, we usually start from a presumption that expanding the
range of available securities is beneficial. Yet that has resulted in a deeply unsatisfactory
outcome.
One view is that we need to bring psychology and the insights of behavioural economics into
the study of financial markets (e.g. Akerlof and Shiller, 2009). That may indeed be part of
producing a richer and more accurate description of financial market behaviour, particularly
in regard to expectations formation. But, as I hope my lecture this evening has made clear,
distorted incentives, information failings, collective action problems and network effects have
played a large part in recent events. Our standard analytic toolkit should get us a long way in
understanding what has happened. And that is one step on the road to avoiding a repeat.
Third, we need to pay more heed to the lessons of history. Financial booms and busts have
occurred with some regularity ever since the Tulip Mania of 1636-7. Yet we tend to treat
them as pathologies that happen at other times or in other places. Their frequency suggests
that we would be better advised to think of them as a central feature of capitalist economies
that our models should aspire to explain.
Fourth, we need to put credit back into macroeconomics in a meaningful way. Financial
intermediaries are conspicuous by their absence in the workhorse New Keynesian/New
Classical DSGE model. The focus is on intrinsic dynamics resulting from inter-temporal
decision-making in the face of a variety of adjustment costs and impediments to price
adjustment; there are no financial frictions to speak of. That such a framework has developed
is unsurprising in the light of the Great Inflation and its subsequent Great Moderation. But the
fact that financial intermediation plays a negligible role in Mike Woodford's magisterial stateof-the-art opus, Interest and Prices, speaks volumes.
Some authors have sought to introduce financial frictions into the standard framework 12 . But
in virtually all of this literature, financial intermediaries – if present at all – are very simple

12

16

See e.g. Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2008); Curdia and Woodford (2009); Gerali, Neri, Sessa and
Signoretti (2008); Goodfriend and McCallum (2007), as well as the earlier work on the broad credit channel

BIS Review 101/2009

institutions and any incentive or information problems relate to the borrower. But much of
what has happened recently is best understood in terms of frictions that lie within the
financial sector itself. Models that have a role for bank capital and where the evolution of
banks' balance sheets play a central role 13 , such as the recent contribution by Gertler and
Karadi (2009) mentioned earlier, come closest to providing a suitable framework for analysis.
However, even these contributions neglect important features of the present crisis.
Developing macroeconomic models with a sufficiently rich specification of the financial
intermediation sector that capture the variety of incentive distortions and information frictions
I have discussed this evening represents a challenging research agenda 14 .
Reintroducing the financial intermediation sector as a source of shocks, rather than merely
acting as an amplifying mechanism as the broad credit channel does, would represent
something of a return to older models of the business cycle, in which credit creation and
destruction played a central role. There has, in particular, been renewed interest in the work
of Hyman Minsky as a result of recent events (see e.g. Minsky, 1982). In Minsky's theory of
endogenous financial booms and busts, prosperous times lead to an excess availability of
credit and the gradual development of credit-fuelled asset-price bubbles. Financial crises
result when those debt levels become excessive – a so-called “Minsky” moment. A credit
crunch then ensues leading to a downturn in the real economy. Much of what I have said this
evening contains echoes of Minsky's theory.
As a student at Harvard, Minsky was a protege of Schumpeter, whose teaching influenced
him greatly. Schumpeter viewed credit as an essential ingredient of the capitalist machine.
He would surely have regretted the downplaying of financial intermediation in
macroeconomics over the past forty years. And he would surely endorse the need to rectify
that omission now. So let me leave the final words to him:
“Credit creation [is] the monetary complement of innovation. This relation…is at the bottom of
all the problems of money and credit.” (Schumpeter, 1939, p.111)
Bibliography
Adrian, T. and Shin, H.S. (2008), “Financial intermediaries, financial stability and monetary
policy”, in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, pp. 287-334. Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City.
Aikman, D. and Paustian, M. (2006), “Bank capital, asset prices and monetary policy”, Bank
of England working paper 305.
Akerlof, G. A. and Shiller, R. J. (2009), Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the
Economy, and Why It Matters for Global Capitalism. Princeton University Press: Princeton.
Andrés, J., López-Salido, J. D. and Nelson, E. (2004), “Tobin’s imperfect asset substitution in
optimising general equilibrium”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis working paper 2004003A.
Borio, C. and White, W. (2003), “Whither monetary and financial stability? The implications of
evolving policy regimes”, in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing
Economy, pp. 131-212. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Kansas City.

discussed in Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999). There is also the strand of work stemming from Kiyotaki
and Moore (1997).
13

Other recent contributions on the bank capital channel include Aikman and Paustian (2006); Chen (2001);
Meh and Moran (2004); Van der Heuvel (2008).

14

Recent contributions with richer models of the banking sector, but less developed specifications of the
macroeconomy include Goodhart, Sunirand and Tsomocos (2005, 2006) and Uhlig (2009).

BIS Review 101/2009

17

Bean, C.R. (2003), “Asset prices, financial imbalances and monetary policy: are inflation
targets enough?” in Asset Prices and Monetary Policy (eds. A. Richards and T. Robinson),
pp. 48-76. Reserve Bank of Australia: Sydney.
Bernanke, B. S., (2004), “The Great Moderation”, remarks at the Eastern Economic
Association, Washington, DC, 20 February.
Bernanke, B. S., (2005), “The global saving glut and the US current account deficit”,
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, 10 March.
Bernanke, B. S., and Blinder, A.S. (1988), “Credit, money and aggregate demand”, American
Economic Review, vol. 78(2), pp. 435-439.
Bernanke, B., and Gertler, M. (2001), “Should central banks respond to movements in asset
prices?”, American Economic Review, May, 91(2), pp. 253-257.
Bernanke, B.S., Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S. (1999), “The financial accelerator in a quantitative
business cycle framework”, in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.) Handbook of
Macroeconomics, pp. 1341-1393. North-Holland.
Buiter, W. H., and Panigirtzoglou, N. (1999), “Liquidity traps: How to avoid them and how to
escape them”, NBER working paper 7245.
Brunner, K. and Meltzer, A. (1972), “Money, debt and economic activity”, Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 80, pp. 951-977.
Brunnermeier, M. K. (2009), “Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-8”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, vol. 23(1), Winter, pp. 77-100.
Caballero, R. J., Farhi E. and Gourinchas, P-O (2008), “An equilibrium model of global
imbalances and low interest rates”, American Economic Review, vol. 98(1), pp. 358-393.
Caballero, R. J., and Krishnamurthy, A. (2008), “Collective risk management in a flight to
quality episode”, Journal of Finance, vol. 63(5), pp. 2195-2230.
Cecchetti, S., Genberg, H., and Wadhwani, S. (2002), “Asset prices in a flexible inflation
targeting framework”, in W. Hunter, G. Kaufman and M. Pomerleano, eds., Asset Price
Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory and International Policies. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp.427-444.
Chen, N. K. (2001), “Bank net worth, asset prices and economic activity”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 48(2), pp. 415-436.
Christiano, L. J., Motto, R. and Rostagno, M. (2008), “Financial factors in business cycles”,
mimeo, Northwestern University.
Clarida, R., Gali, J. and Gertler, M. (2000), “Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic
stability: evidence and some theory”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115(1), pages
147-180.
Cogley, T. and Sargent, T. (2005), ”Drifts and volatilities: monetary policy and outcomes in
the post-WWII US”, Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8, pages 262-302.
Curdia, V., and Woodford, M. (2009), “Credit frictions and optimal monetary policy”, mimeo.
Dooley, M.P., Folkerts-Landau and Garber, P. (2004), “The revived Bretton Woods system”,
International Journal of Finance and Economics, vol. 9, pp. 307-313.
Dowd, K., Cotter, J., Humphrey, C. and Woods, M. (2008), “How unlucky is 25-sigma?”,
Nottingham University Business School CRIS working paper 2008.III, March.
Freeman, R.B. (2008), “Labor market imbalances: Shortages, surpluses or what?”, in J.
Sneddon Little, ed., Global Imbalances and the World Economy, pp. 159-182. Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston: Boston.

18

BIS Review 101/2009

Furceri, D., and Mourougane, A. (2009), “The effects of financial crises on potential output:
New empirical evidence from OECD countries”, OECD Working Paper 699, May.
Gerali, A., Neri, S., Sessa, L., and Signoretti, F. M. (2008), “Credit and banking in a DSGE
model”, mimeo.
Gertler, M., and Karadi, P. (2009), “A model of unconventional monetary policy”, mimeo,
NYU, April.
Goodfriend, M., and McCallum B.T. (2007), “Banking and interest rates in monetary policy
analysis: a quantitative exploration”, Journal of Monetary Economics 54(5), pp. 1480-1507.
Goodhart, C. A. E., P. Sunirand, and D. Tsomocos (2005), “A risk assessment model for
banks”, Annals of Finance 1(2), pp.197-224.
Goodhart, C. A. E., P. Sunirand, and D. Tsomocos (2006), “A model to analyse financial
fragility”, Economic Theory 27 (1), pp.107-42.
Gorton, G. (2008), “The panic of 2007” in Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial
System. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas, Kansas City, pp. 131-262.
Greenspan, A. (2002) “World Finance and Risk Management”, Speech at Lancaster House,
25 September.
Greenspan, A. (2002) “Opening Remarks” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy, pp.1-10. Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City.
Haldane, A. G. (2009), “Rethinking the financial network”, Speech at Financial Student
Association, Amsterdam, April.
International Monetary Fund (2008), World Economic Outlook, October. Washington, DC.
King, M.A. (1999), “Challenges for monetary policy: New and old”, New Challenges for
Monetary Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas, Kansas City, pp. 11-58.
Kiyotaki, N., Moore, J. (1997), “Credit cycles”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 105(2),
pp.211-248.
Lubik, T. and Schorfheide, F. (2004), “Testing for indeterminacy: an application to US
monetary policy”, American Economic Review, vol. 94(1), pages 190-217.
Meier, A., (2009), “Panacea, curse or non-event? Unconventional monetary policy in the
United Kingdom”, IMF Working Paper, July.
Meh, C. and Moran, K., (2004), “The role of bank capital in the propagation of shocks”, Bank
of Canada Working Paper 2004-6.
Miller, M. H., Weller, P. A. and Zhang, L. (2002) “Moral hazard and the US stock market:
Analysing the Greenspan put”, Economic Journal, vol. 112, pp. C171-C186.
Minsky, H. (1982), “The financial-instability hypothesis: Capitalist processes and the behavior
of the economy” in Kindleberger and Laffargue, editors, Financial Crises.
Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2008), “Is the US sub-prime financial crisis so different?
An international historical comparison”, American Economic Review, vol.98(2), pp. 339-344.
Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2009), “The aftermath of financial crises”, American
Economic Review,
Schumpeter, J. A. (1939), Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical, and Statistical Analysis
of the Capitalist Process. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sims, C. and Zha, T. (2006), “Were there regime switches in US monetary policy?”,
American Economic Review, vol. 96(1), pages 54-81.

BIS Review 101/2009

19

Stock, J. and Watson, M. (2003), “Has the business cycle changed? Evidence and
explanations”, in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty, pp. Federal Reserve Board of Kansas
City: Kansas City.
Taylor, J. B. (2007), “Housing and monetary policy” in Housing, Housing Finance and
Monetary Policy, pp. 463-476. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Kansas City.
Taylor, J. B. (2009), “The financial crises and the policy responses: An empirical analysis of
what went wrong”, NBER working paper 14631, January.
Tobin, J. (1969), “A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory”, Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, vol. 1(1), pp15-29.
Uhlig, H (2009), “A model of a systemic bank run”, NBER working paper 15072.
Van den Heuvel, S.J. (2008), “The welfare cost of bank capital requirements”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 55, pp. 298-320.
White, W. R. (2006), “Is price stability enough?”, Bank for International Settlements working
paper 205, April.
Woodford, M. (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton University Press: Princeton.

20

BIS Review 101/2009

BIS Review 101/2009

21

22

BIS Review 101/2009

BIS Review 101/2009

23

24

BIS Review 101/2009

BIS Review 101/2009

25

26

BIS Review 101/2009

BIS Review 101/2009

27

28

BIS Review 101/2009

BIS Review 101/2009

29

30

BIS Review 101/2009

Andrew G Haldane: Credit is trust
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at
the Association of Corporate Treasurers, Leeds, 14 September 2009.
I would like to thank Paul Fullerton, Simon Hall and Salina Ladha for help in the preparation of this speech.

*

*

*

It is good to be back in Yorkshire. I say back because I grew up around 10 miles north of
here. When I left over 20 years ago, Leeds looked and felt very different to today. Nowhere is
the contrast greater than in the financial sector. In 1995, almost 74,000 people were
employed in financial and related business services, accounting for around 20% of
employment in Leeds. By 2009 this had risen to over 116,000, or around 30% of
employment. Today, Leeds has a legitimate claim to be the UK’s second largest financial
centre.
A short history of banking in Yorkshire
The foundations for this success were laid much earlier. The history of banking in Yorkshire
dates back over 250 years.1 Pease and Co of Hull, established in 1754, are thought to be
Yorkshire’s oldest private bank. In the same decade, banks were founded in Leeds and
Bradford. By the end of the 18th century, Yorkshire had a well-established network of over 40
banks in around 16 regional towns and cities.
In the first two decades of the 19th century, private banking in Yorkshire continued to thrive,
spreading to around 30 towns and cities. The financial crisis of 1825 brought an end to this
rapid growth. The crisis itself was interesting for its parallels with today. It was sourced in
sub-prime lending in (in this case South) America. As fears of loan losses rose, runs began
on banks throughout England, with more than a dozen institutions failing in Yorkshire alone.
The crisis brought reform of the banking industry in the form of the Joint Stock Banking Act of
1826. This removed the Bank of England’s monopoly on joint stock banking. This had long
been a bone of contention among country banks, not least in Yorkshire. The Bank of England
itself opened its first branch in Yorkshire – here in Leeds, in fact – the following year in 1827.
This was acknowledgement of Leeds’ emerging importance as a financial centre. Yet the
reception it received was, to say the least, somewhat mixed.
Local newspapers and businessmen attacked the Bank’s attempt to spread its “pestilential
branches” into the regions.2 Bank of England notes were shunned by local shopkeepers. The
landlady of the Esk Inn near Whitby did so with the words:
“I’ll ha’ nought to do with them things, I know nought about them; now if it had
been a Simpson I would ha’ changed it with pleasure”3

1

W.C.E Hartley (1975), “Banking in Yorkshire”, Dalesman Books. The author completed this work while a
Houblon-Norman fellow at the Bank of England.

2

Quoting Joseph Brook, a prominent Huddersfield banker, at a meeting of the Huddersfield Banking
Corporation in January 1828.

3

Hartley (op.cit.). A “Simpson” was a note offered by local bank Simpson, Chapman and Co of Whitby. Through
a sequence of mergers, this subsequently became part of what is today Barclays Bank.

BIS Review 108/2009

1

It is easy to imagine, though probably impossible to print, what she might have made of
Quantitative Easing.
In the period since, banking and finance in Yorkshire have grown steadily and successfully.
Among the success stories would be the Yorkshire Penny Bank. This was founded in 1859 in
Halifax as a means of saving for the working classes. In 1874, its first School Transfer
Department was opened to encourage saving by school children. “Take care of the Pence
and the Pounds will take care of themselves” intoned the bank’s posters.
Such was the success of the school scheme that, by the end of the nineteenth century, the
majority of schoolchildren in Yorkshire had a savings account. The scheme aimed to educate
children from an early age on the benefits of thrift and financial planning. And having been
nurtured early, the relationship between bank and customer often lasted a lifetime. In 1959,
the Yorkshire Penny Bank became Yorkshire Bank which today remains one of the UK’s
most successful medium-sized banks.
The mutual or building society sector’s roots in Yorkshire are just as deep.4 Although the first
societies appeared in the Midlands in around 1775, within a decade Yorkshire had
established its first society, the Hill House Bank Building Club in 1785. By the end of the
century, numbers had swelled to around 50, mostly in the Midlands, Lancashire and
Yorkshire.
The early mutuals pooled savings to buy property for members and terminated once all
members’ housing needs were satisfied – so-called “terminating societies”. In 1844,
“permanent societies” were permitted, which allowed for a revolving set of both savers and
borrowers. But the mutuality principle remained – “to enable a working man to secure himself
in the course of a few years a dwelling-house as his own freehold property, as a home for
himself and family.”5
Numbers of mutuals grew rapidly during the 19th century, reaching around 850 by 1850 and
over 1500 by 1875, with almost 100 in Yorkshire alone. Here in Leeds, the Leeds and
Holbeck Permanent Building Society was founded in 1875 and, having been renamed Leeds
Building Society in 2005, it remains in the top 10 building societies by size nationally.
Consolidation and, latterly, demutualization have reduced numbers over the past few
decades. Today, there are only a handful of independent, indigenous mutuals in the region.
But they remain some of the strongest in the country.
The success of Yorkshire’s financial sector over this lengthy period is no fluke. A reading of
history reveals the same successful recipe being repeated. An awareness of, and
responsiveness to, the needs of the customer, whether saver or borrower. A focus on longterm relationship-building, often starting from the earliest age. A recognition of the benefits of
mutualising both risks and returns. In short, the importance of banks being built, first and
foremost, on trust.
The crisis of trust
From the past, then, to the present. A year ago almost to the day, the investment bank
Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy in the United States. Activity across the globe, financial
and non-financial, froze. Recently, there are indications of some thawing. But a year on,
many economies around the world remain mired in recession. What explains the severity of
this crisis and how much longer can it be expected to last?

4

See E.J. Cleary (1965), “The Building Society Movement”, Elek Books. See also S.J. Price (1958), “Building
Societies, their origin and history”, Franey and Company.

5

S.J. Price (1958), “Building Societies: Their Origin and History”, Franey and Company.

2

BIS Review 108/2009

The words “credit crunch” contain the seeds of an explanation. In Latin, credit means trust.
So credit crunch is, in essence, a breakdown in trust. Between different parties at different
times, that loss of trust has been the root cause of the devastating impact felt globally since
the credit crunch began. It also explains why the road to recovery in credit, and thus in the
real economy, may be long and winding. In essence, events of the past two years can be retold as a story of the progressive breakdown in trust.
The proximate cause of the crisis was a breakdown of trust between banks and households,
specifically sub-prime mortgage-holders in the United States. The upshot was a loss of
credit, and in many cases the homes, of these borrowers from 2006 onwards. Repossession
rates on US mortgages have more than tripled in the past two years (Chart 1). UK arrears
and default rates, although lower, are rising. Some borrowers are now rationed out of the
mortgage market. In July 2007, there were around 9500 sub-prime mortgage products being
advertised in the UK. Today, there are virtually none (Chart 2).
As losses on these mortgages and other toxic assets accumulated, trust among banks was
impaired. This saw a seizing-up of inter-bank money markets from the second half of 2007
onwards. Before the crisis, banks required about 10 basis points of compensation for making
a three-month loan to one another (Chart 3). By September 2007, that compensation
premium had risen tenfold to around 100 basis points. By September 2008, it had risen more
than thirty-fold from pre-crisis levels. It has since fallen back to around 35 basis points.
These persistent funding pressures have constrained banks’ ability to lend to the real
economy.
Damaged by losses on assets and constrained by funding costs, questions began to be
raised during 2008 about banks’ future profitability and, in some cases, viability. The equity
prices of banks tumbled, falling 86% on average for the major UK banks between February
2007 and March this year (Chart 4). In money terms, that is a loss of market capitalisation of
around £300bn, equivalent to 20% of annual UK GDP. Underlying these price falls was a
generalised loss of trust between banks and investors in banks, such as sovereign wealth
funds and mutual funds.
What explained this wholesale loss of trust? In the run-up to the crisis, banks’ business
models were increasingly predicated on making loans for onward sale. Loans became
tradable securities and long-term relationships gave way to short-term transactions. The
perils of this practice were well understood by Michael Marks, founder of Marks and Spencer
and of course one of the region’s greatest-ever entrepreneurs: “You either make things or
you sell them. Don’t try both”.
Banks tried both, making loans with an eye to subsequently selling them. This had
unintended, but in fact entirely predictable, consequences. Without skin in the game, banks’
due diligence became slipshod. The quality of tradable loans fell as their quantity rose.
Investors in these securities were not as canny as the landlady of the Esk Inn: they
purchased them in size even though “they knew nought about them”. By the time the penny
had dropped for these investors, the pounds had not taken care of themselves. Global losses
on these securitised assets are now believed to lie anywhere up to £3 trillion.6 As losses
accumulated, trust in these securities was undermined and with it trust in the banks issuing
them.
As credit was cut, trust in the viability of some non-financial companies was questioned.
Corporate distress began to rise internationally during the course of 2008. And as corporate
distress rose, in particular after the failure of Lehman Brothers, distrust between companies
mounted. The stream of trade credit extended between firms dried to a trickle at the end
2008 and in the first part of 2009. At that time, a survey by the Bank’s regional agents

6

For example, Bank of England Financial Stability Report, June 2009.

BIS Review 108/2009

3

reported that around a quarter of contacts had had to turn down potentially profitable orders
as a result of tighter trade credit.
This progressive hardening of the credit arteries also had dramatic effects between
countries. Cross-border flows of credit have reversed dramatically in the past year. “Home
bias” by investors – a lack of trust in foreign investments – has returned with a vengeance.
Cross-border lending by international banks grew by 20% per year between 2003 and 2007.
In 2008, it fell 5% (Chart 5). This has had adverse effects on UK companies, around a third
of whose borrowing comes from foreign lenders.
Through these successive waves, the world financial system found itself with almost every
link in the credit chain – in the chain of trust – having been weakened or broken. That is
evident in surveys of the public’s trust in industry: banking and finance are firmly rooted to
the foot of the league table of trust, in the UK and internationally (Chart 6). That loss of trust
is mirrored in aggregate bank lending in the UK, in particular to companies, where annual
growth has fallen from a peak of 23% in March 2008 to around zero now (Chart 7). And this
has in turn been reflected in the largest and most synchronous global economic slowdown
since the Great Depression.
Confidence and credit
So how is trust, and thereby credit, to be restored? To date, the answer has been to rely on
the one sector whose credit has not been seriously questioned – governments and central
banks. There has been large-scale provision of government and central bank credit over the
past two years in an attempt to ease pressures and shore up breaks in the private sector
credit chain.
These interventions have been unprecedented in size during peacetime. The total potentially
on the table is in excess of $14 trillion.7 That is roughly $2000 for every man, woman and
child on the planet. Half of the world’s 20 largest banks have needed direct government
support. Central bank balance sheets in the major financial centres, including in the UK, have
more than doubled in size. And deposit insurance schemes have been extended in at least
40 countries around the world.
Extending public sector credit on this scale relies on the deep pockets and prudence of our
grandchildren. It can be no more than a stop-gap – a temporary bridge – until private sector
trust can be restored. So far, the bridge has served its purpose. There are signs over recent
months from surveys that confidence is returning to banks, non-financial companies and
consumers. And there have been some signs of a turnaround in the housing, equity and
some debt markets.
It has been said that every recession in history has been associated with a collapse in
confidence.8 This time’s was plainly no exception. So with confidence turning can we
anticipate an imminent return of credit to the economy?
Rising confidence among firms and consumers is a necessary condition for recovery. But it is
questionable whether it is sufficient. That is because confidence and trust are subtly different
concepts.9 Confidence derives from observable, authoritative proof. At the time of the failure
of Lehman Brothers, people struggled to make sense of the state of the economy and
financial system. Without a compass, they lost their financial bearings. Lacking authoritative

7

Bank of England Financial Stability Report, June 2009.

8

“Animal Spirits”, George Akerlof and Robert J Shiller (2009), Princeton University Press.

9

For example, see “Restoring Confidence and Trust in UK PLC”, Henley Business School (2009).

4

BIS Review 108/2009

proof, confidence collapsed. As the banking system has since stabilised, people’s bearings
have returned and with them confidence.
Trust is an altogether different animal. It is based on beliefs, not observable proofs. It is
grounded in perceptions rather than evidence. It is as much a psychological state as a
financial one.10 A clean balance sheet might instil confidence, but it need not repair trust.
Because it is a moral judgement, repairing trust can be a slow and painstaking business.
Moral compasses take rather longer to self-correct than magnetic ones. This has implications
for the path of recovery in the period ahead.
Historically, credit has tended to lag the recovery in output in the majority of recessions,
especially financial recessions. During the previous three major recessions in the UK – in the
1970s, 1980s and 1990s – credit to business recovered slowly and in some cases only
several years after the recovery in activity (Charts 8, 9 and 10). This is consistent with trust
between financial institutions and their customers being slower to recover than confidence
more generally.
Moreover, unlike the situation today, earlier recessions in the UK were not primarily the result
of financial factors. International evidence suggests that financial recessions have tended on
average to be both costlier and lengthier.11 Normal recessions have been associated with a
recovery in output to its previous peak after around 3 ½ quarters. Recovery to peak output
following financial recessions has on average taken around 5 ½ quarters (Chart 11).
Like its predecessors, lack of confidence may have “caused” this time’s recession. But it is
lack of trust – and hence credit – that may shape the recovery. Based on past evidence, as
the Governor has noted recently, we might anticipate a protracted period of repair.
Repairing trust – the low road to reform
So what might be needed, beyond time, to repair trust in the financial system? A raft of
reforms to the financial system, nationally and internationally, is currently being assembled.
These measures will aim to strengthen banks’ financial resources, risk management
practices and governance. They are about bringing regulatory rules into the 21st century.
This is the high road to reform – for example, higher buffers of capital and liquidity and higher
standards of risk management. If successful, these reforms will help cleanse bank balance
sheets. It is an open question, however, whether these efforts will be sufficient to restore
public trust in the financial system.
One reason why regulation might not be the whole answer is that trust in financial regulation
is itself one of the casualties of crisis. Regulation is seen by some as part of the problem, not
the solution. More generally, in repairing public trust, it would be preferable if banks were
seen to be initiating root and branch reform themselves, rather than having it thrust upon
them by regulators.
This would be the low road to reform. Low because it would not require any new or complex
regulatory apparatus. Low because it would not need international negotiation or agreement
on the contractual fineprint. Instead, what it would require is a self-generated sea-change in
the structure and strategy of banking.
So what changes in structure and strategy might be desirable? Without suggesting definitive
answers, let me discuss three areas where further debate might be useful: banks’ size in

10

David Tuckett provides a fascinating account of the crisis and its aftermath using psychological theories and
evidence (“Addressing the Psychology of Financial Markets”, Institute for Public Policy Research, May 2009).

11

“Is the US Sub-Prime Crisis So Different? An International Comparison”, Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth
Rogoff (2008), NBER Working Paper No.13761.

BIS Review 108/2009

5

relation to the services they provide; banks’ strategy in relation to their resilience; and banks’
governance in relation to the incentives this creates.
•

Structure – size versus service provision

Economies of scale typically arise in the production of goods and services which are
homogenous and replicable. Henry Ford applied this principle to car manufacture through his
Ford Motor Company, established almost a century ago. It was a success. That model has
since served many industries well.
But manufacturing loans is not the same as manufacturing cars. Loans are neither
homogenous nor replicable. Making loans relies on bespoke, customer-specific information.
This information is not obtained by computer algorithm or credit rating agency but through a
banking relationship, ideally a long-term one. Despite the advent of social networking,
economies of scale are not something we typically associate with long-term relationships.
So the economics of banking do not suggest that bigger need be better. Indeed, if largescale processing of loans risks economising on the collection of information, there might
even be diseconomies of scale in banking. The present crisis provides a case study. The
desire to make loans a tradable commodity led to a loss of information, as transactions
replaced relationships and quantity trumped quality. Within the space of a decade, banks
went from monogamy to speed-dating.
Evidence from a range of countries paints a revealing picture. There is not a scrap of
evidence of economies of scale or scope in banking – of bigger or broader being better –
beyond a low size threshold.12 At least during this crisis, big banks have if anything been
found to be less stable than their smaller counterparts, requiring on average larger-scale
support.13 It could be argued that big business needs big banks to supply their needs. But
this is not an argument that big businesses themselves endorse, at least according to a
recent survey by the Association of Corporate Treasurers.14
Take Grameen Bank – not a household name in the UK, I realise. This grew out of a microfinance project in Bangladesh which began in 1976.15 Grameen operates as a set of local
credit cooperatives, often comprising as few as five members. The bank’s relationship with
its borrowers is bound not by legal contract but by trust. Like the Yorkshire Penny Bank a
century earlier, it aims to encourage saving by the poor and supports the education of the
children of borrowers and savers.
In some respects, Grameen Bank is about as basic and small-scale a set of banking
arrangements as it is possible to conceive. But its success is only too clear. From the most
modest of beginnings, Grameen Bank now operates in over 40 countries worldwide, with
over 2000 branches and over 7.5 million borrowers. Grameen is a local bank gone global.
Henry Ford grew an empire on scale economies, centralisation and replication. For the Ford
Motor Company, bigger was better. At around the same time, Alfred P Sloan of General
Motors was following a different business model. Size still mattered. But production was

12

13

14

15

6

See A. Saunders (1996), “Financial Institutions Management: A Modern Perspective”, Irwin Professional
Publishing. Also see D. Amel, C. Barnes, F. Panetta and C. Salleo (2004), “Consolidation and efficiency in the
financial sector: A review of the international evidence”, Journal of Banking & Finance Volume 28, Issue 10.
Haldane
(2009),
“Small
Lessons
From
a
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech397.pdf

Big

Crisis”.

See

The Association of Corporate Treasurers (2009), “Comments in response to Turner Review: a regulatory
response to the global banking crisis and the accompanying FSA discussion paper DP 09/02 – A regulatory
response to the global banking crisis”.
David Bornstein (1996), “The Price of a Dream: The Story of the Grameen Bank”, Oxford University Press.

BIS Review 108/2009

decentralised and specialised. The focus was on customer needs supported by some of the
first-ever market research on their tastes. In the end, it was Sloan and General Motors whose
strategy was emulated around the world.
In meeting the future needs of the real economy, perhaps there is a case for more “Sloans”
and fewer “Fords” in banking. Perhaps there is a case for a strategic focus on the “local” as
much as the “global”, for more micro-finance and less macro-finance. Perhaps it is time for
relationship-banking to make a comeback.
•

Strategy – diversity versus diversification

Customers require a basket of banking services. The provision of some of these services is
important for the wider economy; they are a quasi-public good. For example, the provision of
monetary services – basic banking – has a strong public good element. That is why depositor
protection, in the form of deposit insurance, is stipulated by the state in many countries.
Lending to households and companies can also be thought to contain a public good element.
Other functions performed by banks may provide more limited social benefits, though their
private benefit may be significant – for example, proprietary trading in complex instruments.
If scale economies in banking are weak, banking services could probably be equally well
provided by either a financial supermarket or a set of specialist banks. These different
structures might not, however, be equivalent from a risk perspective. The supermarket model
potentially does offer some risk benefits – the benefits of diversification. Profitable business
lines can compensate for temporarily non-profitable ones. What is lost on the swings may be
regained on the roundabouts.
This is a story about which we have heard much over the past few months, especially among
the biggest global banks. In the first half of this year, big losses on the banking book swings
have been more than offset by big gains on the trading book roundabouts. Diversification, we
were told, was paying dividends – and, indeed, bonuses.
But memories can be deceptively short. Rewind the clock one year. Then, it was trading
book losses that were eroding confidence in the banks. This in turn prompted fears about
some banks’ solvency, aggravating the very recession which is now generating banking book
losses. Trading book gains may well be acting as a hedge today. But they are hedging a risk
they helped create.
All of this implies that business line diversification can be a double-edged sword. During the
upswing, banks enjoyed windfall gains from bets at the race-track. This boosted their buffers.
But when those bets turned sour, these same activities put at risk banks’ day job – the
provision of loan and deposit services to the real economy. 9500 sub-prime mortgage
products at the height of the boom might well have been too many. But zero is surely too
few.
There is a second important downside to diversification. While it might be sensible for an
individual firm to diversify its business lines to reduce its risk, if this same strategy is followed
by all banks the end-result may be greater fragility across the whole system. Why? Because
in their desire to look different than in the past, banks’ business strategies may end up
looking identical in the present. The financial system could then become more prone to herdlike upswings and lemming-like downswings.
There is more than a hint of this behaviour during the run-up to crisis. Banking strategies
became a whirligig. Building societies transformed themselves into commercial banks.
Commercial banks tried their hand at investment banking. Investment banks developed inhouse hedge funds through large proprietary trading desks. Hedge funds competed with
traditional investment funds. And to complete the circle, these investment funds imported the
risk all of the others were shedding. In their desire to diversify, individual banks generated a
lack of diversity, and thus resilience, for the financial system as a whole.

BIS Review 108/2009

7

So recent crisis experience highlights some of the costs of bundling banking services. Given
that, there is an intellectually defensible case for some unbundling of these services. This
would reduce the risks of spill-over between privately and socially beneficial banking
activities. And it would help prevent banks making individually rational but collectively
calamitous strategic choices.
There are plenty of examples from the non-financial world, from genetics to geology, of
diversity improving the robustness of systems. The financial system may be no different. The
resulting financial landscape would, however, look rather different. There would be greater
specialisation and diversity. The shopping experience for a banking customer would be more
farmers’ market than supermarket.
•

Governance – stakeholders versus shareholders

In deciding appropriate corporate governance arrangements, economists have tended to
focus on the relationship between shareholders (as principal) and managers (as agent).
Principal-agent problems arise when these two parties’ incentives are misaligned. Profitrelated pay is one means of achieving alignment, with managers remunerated in line with
shareholder returns. In addressing one incentive problem, however, this approach may risk
worsening two others – between shareholders and depositors on the one hand and between
shareholders and the public sector on the other.
Limited liability means that returns to shareholders are capped below at zero, but not above.
That provides a natural incentive for owners to gamble, pursuing high risk/high return
strategies from which they import the return upside but export the risk downside to depositors
or the public sector. During this crisis, the pursuit of those strategies has resulted in the
public sector picking up the cheque for the downside in an effort to reduce risks to
depositors.
A mutual model of corporate governance gives rise to a rather different set of incentives.
Instead of external shareholders, savers and borrowers become the owners, with profits
remitted directly to them in the form of higher deposit rates and/or lower borrowing rates. For
that reason, measured profit margins appear consistently lower for building societies than for
banks.
Unlike in most industries, however, low margins for a mutual are very unlikely to result in
shareholder revolt or a missive to management to gear-up or get-out. They are a reflection of
corporate governance working for stakeholders, here defined broadly to include depositors
and borrowers. In this way, mutuality reduces the scope for misaligned incentives between
shareholders and depositors which might otherwise arise in a joint stock bank.
This is not to suggest that mutuality is a panacea. For example, it does not address the
potential incentive problem between stakeholders and the public sector. Indeed, it could even
potentially worsen this problem as shareholders and depositors are one and the same under
mutuality and so must rank equally in the event of a payout from the public purse. Moreover,
profit margins in the building society sector are currently under some pressure as a result of
low Bank rate and increased competition for prime residential loans. Some building societies
have also hit bad loan problems.
Although painful in the short-term, these margin pressures ought in time to abate. So in the
heartland of mutuality, I am happy to say that reports of the death of the building society
sector are greatly exaggerated. Indeed, mutuality may do a better job of aligning stakeholder
incentives than some alternative forms of corporate governance. It is a depressing but telling
fact that, of the demutualised former UK building societies, none is today in independent
ownership.
Thrift, mutuality and relationship-building have long underpinned banking in Yorkshire. These
principles went missing in the run-up to the present crisis. The costs of that vanishing act are
now all too apparent. In rebuilding the financial system, to create one which is both stable

8

BIS Review 108/2009

and better able to meet the needs of the real economy, these principles need to be
rediscovered. They offer a tried and tested – indeed, trusted – roadmap for the period ahead.

BIS Review 108/2009

9

Charts
Chart 1: US mortgage foreclosure inventory rates (a)

Per cent
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
72

76

80

84

88

92

96

00

04

08

*Source: Mortgage Bankers Association of America.
(a) Proportion of outstanding mortgages in foreclosure process
at end of quarter; not seasonally adjusted.

Chart 2: Number of mortgage products advertised

Credit impaired buy-to-let
Credit impaired residential
Prime buy-to-let
Prime residential

T housands
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Feb
Jun
2007

Sep

Jan
08

May

Sep

Jan
09

May

Source: Moneyfacts group.

10

BIS Review 108/2009

Chart 3: Three-month inter-bank spreads (a)

Basis points

Sterling
US dollar

400

Euro

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Jan. May.

Sep.

Jan. May.

Sep.

Jan. May.

08

2007

09

*Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Spread of three-month Libor to three-month overnight indexed
swap (OIS) rates. Five-day moving average
.

Chart 4: Major UK banks’ and LCFIs’ equity prices

Index: 2 July 2007 = 100

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Jul.

Oct.
Jan.
2007

Apr.

Jul.
08

Oct.

Jan.

Apr.
09

Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations.
(a) Data to close of business on 12 June 2009.

BIS Review 108/2009

11

Chart 5: BIS banks’ cross-border lending (a)

Percentage changes on a year earlier
25
20
15
10
5
+
0
Domestic lending

5

Cross-border lending

10
03

04

05

06

07

08

Sources: IMF International Financial Statistics, Bank for International
Settlements and Bank calculations.
(a) The data are weighted averages of fifteen banking systems, where the
weights are based on the relative size of each banking system's cross-border
claims on non-banks.

Chart 6: Trust in different industries

*Source: 2009 Edelman Trust Barometer Report

12

BIS Review 108/2009

Chart 7: Contributions to annual lending growth to UK non-financial companies

Other monetary and financial institutions
Foreign lenders
Major UK-owned banks (b)
Total

Percentage
points
25
20
15
10
5

+
0

Source: Bank of England.
(a) Chart shows twelve-month growth rate in the stock of lending.
04
05 groups of06
07HSBC,
(b)03Includes consolidated
banking
Barclays, LBG,
Nationwide and RBS.

5
08

09

Chart 8: 1970s – Real GDP and real lending

Annual growth

Annual growth

40

8
Mortgage lending
(lhs)
GDP (rhs)

30
20

6
4

10

2

0

0

-10

-2

Business lending
(lhs)

-20

-4

-30

-6
-8

-4

0

4

8

12

Quarters from start of recovery (1975 Q4 = 0)
* Lending series deflated using the GDP deflator. Household M4
lending is proxied with secured lending prior to 1980.

Source: ONS and Bank of England

BIS Review 108/2009

13

Chart 9: 1980s – Real GDP and real lending

Annual growth

Annual growth

40

8
Mortgage
lending (lhs)

30
20

6
4

GDP (rhs)

10

2

0

0

-10

-2

Business
lending (lhs)

-20

-4

-30

-6
-8

-4

0

4

8

12

Quarters from start of recovery (1981 Q2 = 0)
*Lending series deflated using the GDP deflator. Household M4
lending is proxied with secured lending prior to 1980.

Source: ONS and Bank of England

Chart 10: 1990s – Real GDP and real lending

Annual growth

25

Annual growth

10

Business
lending
(lhs)

20
15

GDP (rhs)

8

Mortgage
lending (lhs)

10

6
4

5

2

0

0

-5

-2

-10

-4
-8

-4

0

4

8

12

16

Quarters from start of recovery (1991 Q4 = 0)
* Lending series deflated using the GDP deflator.
Source: ONS and Bank of England

14

BIS Review 108/2009

Chart 11: Recessions and recoveries – median paths

Interquartile range financial recessions
Financial recessions

Mean time to trough

Normal recessions

Mean time to trough

106
104
102
100
98
96

0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Quarters from peak in output

7

8

9

10 11 12

*Source:IMF and Bank of England staff calculations
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2009/01/index.htm

BIS Review 108/2009

15

Spencer Dale: Separating fact from fiction – household balance sheets
and the economic outlook
Speech by Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of
England, at a lunch hosted by the Exeter Chamber of Commerce, Exeter, 24 September
2009.
I would like to thank Andrew Benito, Rohan Churm and Richard Williams for their considerable help in preparing
these remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the
Monetary Policy Committee.

*

*

*

I would like to thank the Exeter Chamber of Commerce for this invitation to speak to you
today.
I have strong ties to this part of the country. My family moved to Exmouth when I was 16. My
father still lives in Exmouth and my parents-in-law in Exeter. So I visit here often.
Exeter was the place that I first studied economics. My family moved to Devon just after I had
completed my “O levels” and I studied for my “A levels” at Exeter college, just a few minutes
walk from here. In fact after today’s lunch, I am going back to Exeter college to see my old
economics tutor – who still teaches “A level” economics – and to spend some time meeting
the current students.
So it is a real pleasure to be here.
The economy appears to have turned. Following the extraordinary falls in output at the end of
last year and the beginning of this year, output appears to have stabilised. And the most
recent output data and business surveys suggest that we are likely to see positive growth in
the second half of 2009.
These indicators have prompted numerous headlines declaring an end to the recession. In a
strict, technical sense that may be right – we may be moving into a period in which positive
growth is resumed. But I would caution against drawing too much comfort from those
headlines. Even if output does expand in the second half of this year, for many families and
businesses it may still feel like we are in the economic doldrums. Unemployment is likely to
continue rising for a period and firms will still face sluggish demand. The recovery may be
slow and protracted.
This caution is often characterised as the Bank being gloomy. But I fear that misses the
point. Let me be clear, compared with the situation we faced only six or nine months ago, the
economic outlook has improved significantly. Output is no longer in free fall, the banking
system has stabilised, confidence levels have improved, and the risk of a really bad
economic depression has receded. To repeat, the economy appears to have turned an
important corner on the road to recovery.
But we are only just starting along that road. The level of national output is estimated to have
fallen by around 5.5% over the past year – the largest four-quarter fall experienced in the
post-war period. Employment has also fallen substantially. These falls have resulted in a
significant degree of economic slack opening up in the economy. Firms are operating below
normal capacity; increasing numbers of people are unable to find jobs. This slack detracts
from our well-being. And, if it persisted, would pull inflation down well below 2% – the target
that I and my colleagues on the Monetary Policy Committee are mandated to aim for. To
meet our target, we need to see a sustained period of robust growth that brings the level of
activity better into balance with the supply capacity of our economy. It is a recovery in the
levels of output and employment that matters, not just a return to positive growth.

BIS Review 114/2009

1

The turnaround in growth is underpinned by the extraordinary loosening in monetary policy
undertaken by the Monetary Policy Committee over the past 12 months. Only a year ago,
Bank Rate was still at 5% and quantitative easing was something we had studied only from
afar. Since then, Bank Rate has been cut to an historical low of 0.5% and the Bank is a
significant way through a programme of asset purchases totalling £175 billion. Economic
activity is being supported further by the easing in fiscal policy, the substantial depreciation in
sterling, and by the fact that the inventory adjustment appears to be beginning to run its
course.
But there are a number of headwinds that are likely to slow the pace of recovery. Credit
conditions remain tight as banks repair their balance sheets. And the global nature of the
economic downturn further highlighted the need for a rebalancing of trade flows between
countries with large current account surpluses and deficits. Both adjustments are likely to
occur only gradually and each has the potential to derail the recovery.
I want to spend a little time today considering a third factor that will shape the recovery: the
extent to which households need to rebuild their balance sheets following the big increase in
household debt.
Spend, spend, spend?
Much has been said about the increase in household debt, both in terms of its role in the
build up to the financial crisis and the extent to which it may dampen the recovery. The
theme of much of this comment is that our current economic difficulties are a payback for
past excesses. Households, it is said, were seduced by easy credit and rising asset prices,
leading to a debt fuelled spending boom. As a result, we now face a period of retrenchment
as we make amends for our former spendthrift ways.
Like much conventional wisdom, these views contain a kernel of truth. But their repetition has
led to exaggeration and distortion. Separating fact from fiction is vital when forming a view on
the economic outlook. Consumer spending accounts for two-thirds of total demand in our
economy; decisions made by consumers up and down the country will be critical in
determining the strength and sustainability of the recovery.
A natural place to start would be with the “consumption boom”, which is often presumed to
have preceded the bust. But in fact there was no such boom. Between the turn of this
century and the onset of the financial crisis, consumer spending increased no faster than it
had done, on average, over the past 40 years. 1 Moreover, the fraction of our national output
consumed by households did not increase.
The kernel of truth in the consumption boom story is that changes in the distribution of our
national income meant that this stable growth of aggregate consumer spending was
associated with a sharp decline in the household savings ratio. The proportion of income that
households set aside fell from close to 10% in 1997 to a little over 2% ten years later.
Although there was no spending boom, households were making less provision for the
future.
Where did all the debt go?
But how does the absence of a spending boom fit with the headlines about the rise in debt.
The big increase in household debt over the past decade is certainly not a myth. Household

1

2

Consumption growth was, however, unusually strong in the period 1996-2000. My colleague Andrew
Sentance has stressed the importance of analysing trends in consumption over longer periods (eg Sentance
2007).

BIS Review 114/2009

debt as a proportion of income increased from 100% to 165% in the 10 years to 2007. If this
big run up in debt was not used to finance a surge in spending, where did it all go?
The answer to this question lies in developments within the housing market. House prices
trebled in the ten years to 2007. And mortgage debts were accumulated to pay for the
housing that had become so much more expensive. The conventional wisdom that the sharp
increase in household debt was associated with the house price boom of the past decade is
well founded.
But what is less often appreciated is that much of that rise in household debt was matched
by a comparable increase in the value of financial assets held by households. The value of
housing assets purchased by households did increase, through additions and improvements
to the housing stock. But the main counterpart to the rise in borrowing was increased saving.
To make this point more concretely: while households accumulated an additional £1trillion of
debt between 2000 and 2008, they also acquired over £750 billion of financial assets over
the same period. 2
What was going on? To caricature things only a little, older households (or rather those
trading down within the housing market) benefited from selling homes at much higher values.
They were the winners. The big losers were younger households (or those trading up),
paying more for those houses and accumulating higher debts. The money borrowed by
young families ended up in the bank accounts of older households. That money wasn’t used
to fuel a spending boom. Rather, it was left on deposit or used to invest in other financial
assets. The huge increase in borrowing by one part of the population was broadly matched
by a big increase in saving by another part.
The increase in house prices over the decade to 2007 – and the massive financial flows
associated with that appreciation – represent a huge redistribution of wealth between
different households within our society.
Two important points should be drawn from this episode.
First, any analysis of the increase in household debt over the past decade has to pay equal
attention to the record accumulation of financial assets. They are two sides of the same coin.
Second, changes in house prices do not result in significant changes in aggregate household
wealth: for every winner gaining from higher house prices is a loser facing less affordable
housing. But that does not mean that changes in house prices can not have significant
implications for the macroeconomy. House price changes may directly affect aggregate
spending both through their effect on the value of housing collateral, and hence on the ability
of households’ to access credit, and through the different propensity of winners and losers to
spend their “windfalls”.
A debt hangover?
Even though the accumulation of debt was not driven by excessive consumption spending,
the sharp falls in asset prices associated with the financial crisis have led to a marked
deterioration in households’ financial position – assets are worth less but the debts still need
to be repaid. The market value of households’ financial and housing assets has fallen by
over 10% over the past two years. Does this mean that there is some form of hole in
households’ balance sheets that will weigh on the recovery as they seek to repair it?

2

This increase reflects purchases of assets. It does not include the returns from these investments.

BIS Review 114/2009

3

Any real or perceived need for households to rebuild their balance sheets may play an active
role in determining their levels of spending. 3 For example, the cost of financing debt and the
uncertainty about future employment prospects may make households reluctant to exceed a
certain level of net borrowing. In this case, the deterioration in the financial position of some
households may cause them to spend less in order to repay debt or increase savings. The
“payback period” I mentioned earlier.
This possibility has focussed much recent attention on the state of households’ balance
sheets. But standard measures of households’ financial position – such as the ratio of debt to
assets – may exaggerate the severity of the problem. That is because these conventional
measures suffer from a “missing” asset and a “missing” liability.
Let me explain.
The “missing” liability is the cost of purchasing a house in the future. This argument is directly
related to the redistribution argument I discussed earlier. Measured in conventional terms,
the marked decline in house prices seen over the past two years has led to a pronounced
deterioration in households’ balance sheets: house prices have declined by around 15% but
the value of outstanding mortgage debt is largely unaffected. The lower level of house prices
will eventually be reflected in a lower level of mortgage debt than otherwise as first-time
buyers (and those trading up the housing ladder) enjoy the benefits of more affordable
housing. But this effect will not fully materialise until the entire housing stock is turned over at
the new lower price level, which may take a considerable time. In the meantime, not taking
account of this missing liability exaggerates the deterioration in households’ underlying
position.
Moreover, by considering only the fall in prices of housing and financial assets, we could be
exaggerating the extent to which people are actually less wealthy. For some households,
these are their only form of assets. This is most obviously the case for the retired. But the
largest asset owned by most people is not measured at all. It is the value of what they expect
to earn in the future or, what economists refer to as “human capital”. Most estimates suggest
the value of future earnings is significantly greater than the sum of net financial wealth and
gross housing assets which typically forms the basis for balance sheet measures. 4 The
significance of this missing asset is that, even though recent events may have impaired
households’ future income prospects, the scale of this reduction is likely to be significantly
less than the falls seen in financial wealth. 5
And it is important to remember that households may opt to mitigate the fall in their wealth
not only through greater saving, but also by working more. Labour demand has, of course,
weakened during the recession and with it the number of hours worked has fallen. But even if
households are not able to increase their supply of labour now, they may plan to do so in the
future, perhaps by delaying their eventual retirement. This may still help to moderate the
extent to which spending falls in the near term.

3

Simple textbook models which tie consumption to permanent income would not predict this sort of behaviour.
However, models which recognise imperfections in financial markets are often consistent with this type of
behaviour, particularly when the effects of uncertainty are explicitly considered. For a discussion of
consumption and saving theory see Berry, Waldron and Williams (2009). For a discussion of interactions
between household debt, house prices and consumption, see Benito, Waldron, Young and Zampolli (2007).

4

For example, Bakhshi (2000) estimated that the value of future earnings (human wealth) represented around
80% of household wealth, whereas net financial wealth and gross housing assets together represented
around 20%.

5

The sum of households’ net financial and gross housing wealth has declined by over 10% since the start of
the crisis. In contrast, external estimates of the loss of supply capacity as a result of the recession, to which
the fall in human capital is likely to be closely related, are around the 4-5% range. See, for example, HMT
(2009) and IMF (2009).

4

BIS Review 114/2009

None of this is to deny that households’ balance sheets have been affected by recent falls in
wealth. But the extent of that deterioration and hence the pressure on households to repair
their balance sheets might be exaggerated by failing to take a more comprehensive view of
their assets and liabilities.
Nevertheless, it is clear that, even putting balance sheets to one side, the financial crisis has
affected households and families in ways that have caused them to spend less. Most directly,
the recession has led to a pronounced weakening of the labour market, with employment
falling and incomes squeezed.
The recession and the sharp rise in unemployment may also have led households to revise
their beliefs about the stability of the economy and with it the predictability of their own
incomes. The period from the early 1990s up to the financial crisis has been dubbed by
economists as the Great Moderation. The UK economy enjoyed over 60 consecutive
quarters of positive economic growth accompanied by low and stable inflation. It is possible
that some households planned on the basis that this increased economic stability would
persist indefinitely. If so, the events of the past two years would have come as a substantial
shock.
Households’ consumption has slowed sharply since the beginning of 2008. Indeed,
consumption is estimated to have fallen for the past five consecutive quarters, the first time
this has happened since records began in 1955. Relative to an average rate of increase, the
level of consumer spending has fallen by around 7½% since the start of 2008, and the
savings rate has increased sharply. There has already been a considerable adjustment in
households’ spending.
In the near-term, the prospects for consumption depend importantly on the performance of
the labour market. Although there has been a substantial fall in employment over the past
year or so, the size of this adjustment to date has, if anything, been less than we might have
feared given the falls in output. This may partly reflect the greater degree of wage flexibility
that has been apparent in this recession compared to that in either the 1980s or 1990s. 6 This
greater flexibility has meant that more of the burden of firms’ adjustment to the recession has
been spread over the workforce as a whole, rather than on those losing their jobs. This may
help to mitigate the slowing in consumption, both because households may find it easier to
borrow to smooth their consumption if they still have a job and because it may limit the extent
to which households increase their savings as a precaution against the possibility of future
job losses.
Further out, the prospects for consumption will depend importantly on the extent to which the
deterioration in households’ financial position does indeed cause them to scale back their
spending. As I have argued, there are good reasons for thinking this may happen. But it is
also important to remember that there has already been a substantial adjustment in
consumption; and that conventional measures of household balance sheets may exaggerate
the scale of deterioration.
Policy
Let me conclude with a few remarks on policy.
The current focus of monetary policy is on ensuring that there is sufficient stimulus in the
economy to generate the strong and sustained recovery necessary to bring demand better
into balance with supply and so ensure that inflation is on track to meet the inflation target.
As I have said, the structural adjustments that need to occur – to the structure of the banking
system; to the balance of global trade flows, and to the level of public and possibly

6

For more information see the box on page 29 of the August 2009 Inflation Report.

BIS Review 114/2009

5

household debt – have the potential to delay and derail the recovery. But monetary policy
can not – and should not – seek to prevent those adjustments. They are necessary for the
long-run stability of our economy. Rather the job of monetary policy – and of public policy
more generally – is to ensure that these adjustments occur in an orderly manner and within
an economic environment which is consistent with hitting the 2% inflation target.
Because it is new and untested, there is understandably considerable nervousness about the
Monetary Policy Committee’s asset purchase programme – a.k.a. quantitative easing. How is
it supposed to work? Will it work?
The essence of the asset purchase programme is to increase the supply of money and credit
in the economy. An important point to stress is that the success of the programme does not
depend on banks returning to a position in which they are able to lend normally. The policy
works by supplying money directly into the economy, not through the banks. Much of the
money is being injected by purchasing government bonds from institutional investors, such
as insurance companies and pension funds. These purchases encourage investors to switch
their portfolios away from gilts into corporate bonds and equities, so improving the supply of
credit to businesses. Companies’ access to credit is further enhanced by the Bank’s
purchases of commercial paper and corporate bonds, which improve the functioning of these
markets.
But is it working? The objective of the asset purchases is to increase the growth of nominal
spending. As with changes in interest rates, it will take some time before we see the impact
of our purchases feeding through into higher aggregate spending and inflation. However,
there are some encouraging signs that the medicine is working. The growth of underlying
broad money has picked up in recent months, especially relative to the weak growth rates we
might otherwise have seen. Interest rates have fallen. Corporate bond spreads have declined
substantially. And the amount of finance raised by companies in bond and equity markets is
at record levels. Not all of these developments can be attributed solely to our actions. But I
have no doubt that asset purchases have played an important role.
At our policy meeting in August, the Monetary Policy Committee voted to maintain Bank Rate
at 0.5% and to increase the scale of our asset purchase programme to £175 billion. That
level of Bank Rate and scale of asset purchases were maintained at the MPC meeting earlier
this month.
You may have notice that at our meeting in August there was a split vote amongst the
Committee. A majority of the Committee – including myself – voted to increase the asset
purchase programme to £175 billion, whereas a minority preferred a larger expansion to
£200 billion. It is important not to make too much of this difference; all members were of the
view that a further degree of monetary stimulus was needed to meet the inflation target.
My own judgment was that the uncertainty surrounding both the economic outlook and the
effects of asset purchases made it difficult to have a strong view as to the relative merits of
increasing the asset purchase programme to £175 billion or £200 billion. Indeed, the inflation
projection that was published in the August Inflation Report suggested that either policy was
consistent with hitting the inflation target, depending on the future path of interest rates. For
me, the decision came down to an assessment of the risks of doing too much versus the
risks of doing too little.
With regard to the potential risks of doing too little, my main concern was that nominal
demand would not recover to a level consistent with hitting the inflation target. My main worry
with doing too much stemmed from the uncertainty associated with using asset purchases as
a policy instrument. We do not have much experience of conducting monetary policy via
asset purchases and there is a risk that their effects will be transmitted through the economy
in ways we do not predict and do not want. For example, the substantial injections of liquidity
might result in unwarranted increases in some asset prices that could prove costly to rectify. I
placed considerable weight on both risks and thought that they were best balanced by an
expansion of the programme to £175 billion.

6

BIS Review 114/2009

I am hopeful that we have started along the road to recovery. The journey is likely to be long
and not without difficulty. But the Monetary Policy Committee stands ready to do whatever it
takes to ensure that the economy moves into better balance and inflation remains on track to
hit the target.
References
Bakhshi, H (2000), “The sensitivity of aggregate consumption to human wealth”, Bank of
England Working Paper no. 108.
Benito, A., Waldron, M., Young, G. and Zampolli, F. (2007) “The role of household debt and
balance sheets in the monetary transmission mechanism” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin
Volume 47, no. 1, pp 70-78.
Berry, S., Waldron, M. and Williams, R. (2009) “Household saving” Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin Volume 49, no. 3, pp 191-201.
HM Treasury (2009), “Budget 2009, Building Britain’s future”.
International Monetary Fund (2009), “United Kingdom: 2009 Article IV Consultation”.
Sentence, A (2007), “The changing pattern of savings: implications for growth and inflation”,
Royal Bank of Scotland / Scottish Economics Society lecture.

BIS Review 114/2009

7

Charles Bean: Quantitative Easing – an interim report
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy at the Bank of England,
to the London Society of Chartered Accountants, London, 13 October 2009.
*

*

*

It’s a great pleasure to be invited to speak to you this afternoon.
It is almost exactly a year since Lehman Brothers collapsed, precipitating a near-fatal heart
attack for the global financial system. And in its wake came an unprecedentedly sharp and
synchronised contraction in global economic activity, from which we are only just starting to
emerge. In part, that stabilisation reflects the intensity of the countervailing policy actions by
governments and central banks around the world. Injections of capital, funding guarantees,
ring-fencing of toxic assets and abundant liquidity support have helped to return the banking
system towards normality, though the process of balance-sheet repair still has some way to
go. And substantial increases in fiscal deficits and aggressively expansionary monetary
policies have helped to arrest the fall in spending, output and employment.
For its part, the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee not only cut Bank Rate from
5% in September last year to just 0.5% in February, but also embarked on a programme of
large scale asset purchases financed by the issuance of extra reserves – so-called
“Quantitative Easing”. This unlovely phrase was originally coined to describe a related policy
conducted by the Bank of Japan in the early part of this decade and has perhaps lost
something in the translation. But sadly it is a phrase that we are now well and truly stuck
with.
Like a lot of our operations, Quantitative Easing can seem a bit mysterious and confusing to
those not steeped in what central banks do. As much of this confusion arises from a
misunderstanding of the Bank of England’s accounts, I am therefore delighted to be speaking
to an audience of accountants, who might find this arcane subject rather exciting!
In January this year, the Chancellor authorised the Bank to create a new fund – the Asset
Purchase Facility – for the purpose of buying assets from the private sector. Any profits on
the Asset Purchase Facility are passed to Her Majesty’s Treasury, while any losses are also
indemnified by the Exchequer. The accounts are therefore not consolidated with the Bank’s
own accounts, as the Bank has no economic interest in the fund.
Initially, the Facility purchased commercial paper, funded by the proceeds of sales of shortterm Treasury bills by the Debt Management Office. This asset swap took credit risk onto the
public sector’s balance sheet and was therefore more akin to a fiscal operation. But since
March, purchases have been on a much larger scale and funded through the issuance of
central bank reserves rather than Treasury bills. The bulk of the purchases have been of
government bonds, though a small quantity of investment-grade corporate bonds have also
been bought. So far, about £164 billion of assets have been purchased in this way, as
against the Monetary Policy Committee’s current target of £175 billion. To put that in
perspective, £175 billion represents roughly 12% of annual GDP.
Technically what happens is the following. The Asset Purchase Facility buys assets funded
by a loan from the Bank. In turn, the Bank funds that loan through additional reserve creation
(Chart 1). If this sounds like financial alchemy, consider how the money flows through the
system. When the Asset Purchase Facility buys a gilt from a pension fund, say, it can be
thought of as paying with a cheque drawn on the Bank of England. The pension fund will
then bank the cheque with its own commercial bank, so the latter now has a claim on the
Bank of England – that is what reserves are. In reality, these payments are not made by
cheque, but rather are carried out electronically. But the principle is the same, though one
key difference is that we pay Bank Rate to the commercial bank on its claim on us, as well as
charging Bank Rate on the loan we make to the Asset Purchase Facility.

BIS Review 126/2009

1

Now I can add detours for the money at any point in this cycle. For example, the pension
fund that sold the gilt to the Asset Purchase Facility might now withdraw its deposit and use it
to purchase a newly issued corporate bond. The company issuing the bond then deposits
that money in their own bank. So now it is the corporate’s bank that holds the claim on us. A
similar sort of circle occurs if the corporate then uses its deposit to buy a new piece of
machinery, because the seller of that machinery will end up putting the proceeds into her
bank, so that the claim on the Bank of England is now held by the capital goods producer’s
bank. Whatever the type of purchase, it will always end up with someone’s commercial bank
having a claim on us. That is even the case if the money is used to buy foreign goods, as the
foreign commercial bank will need to exchange the sterling claim with a commercial bank
that holds an account with us, if it does not do so itself. The only way that the claim can be
eliminated from the system is if a bank chooses to exchange it for cash, which would make
little sense since cash pays no interest at all.
The reason for going through this in such mind-numbing detail is to make the point that the
level of commercial banks’ reserves in aggregate is determined by the way we have funded
the asset purchases, not by the commercial banks’ own decisions. The size of banks’
reserves cannot, as is frequently claimed, be a sign that they are “sitting on them”. No matter
how rapidly or how slowly the economy is growing, or how fast or slow the money is
circulating, the aggregate amount of reserves will be exactly the same. So it should be clear
that the quantity of central bank reserves held by the commercial banks is useless as an
indicator of the effectiveness of Quantitative Easing.
Now obviously we would prefer that the money circulates more rapidly and that this is done
through increased bank lending and deposit taking. In other words, we would like to see a
further expansion of credit and broad money. Since the banks collectively are now awash
with reserves, they should not be prevented from making additional loans because of any
liquidity concerns. Banks are, though, constrained by a lack of capital and are looking to
reduce leverage rather than increase it.
Fortunately, increased bank lending is not necessary for Quantitative Easing to work. Indeed,
it was precisely because the Monetary Policy Committee expected the additional monetary
injection not to stimulate bank lending directly at the current juncture, that the Asset
Purchase Facility’s purchases were targeted at assets held primarily by the non-bank private
sector 1 . So if the Asset Purchase Facility buys gilts from pension funds or asset managers,
they will then have to look for another home for their money. As it is not very rewarding just
to hold it on deposit, they are likely to look to put their money into other assets, including
equities and corporate bonds. Thus not only does the price of gilts rise as a consequence of
the Asset Purchase Facility’s initial purchases, but also the prices of a whole spectrum of
other assets. That in turn lowers the cost of non-bank finance and encourages increased
corporate issuance. Also the rise in asset prices increases wealth and improves balance
sheets. In this way, Quantitative Easing helps to work around the blockage created by a
banking system that is still undergoing a process of balance sheet repair.
That is exactly what we have seen since the Monetary Policy Committee started its asset
purchase program. Gilt yields fell sharply, though they have subsequently risen and fallen
again (Chart 2). But gilt yields can move for a variety of reasons, including changing
expectations of future interest rates. If we control for that by comparing gilt yields with a
measure of market expectations of the future level of Bank Rate (Overnight Indexed Swap
rates for an equivalent maturity), we find that this spread has fallen by around ¾ percentage
point (Chart 3). Moreover, no such movement is observed in either the United States or euro

1

2

That is in contrast to the related policy conducted by the Bank of Japan in the early part of this decade, which
was instead directed at purchases of Japanese government debt held by the banking sector.

BIS Review 126/2009

area, which strongly suggests that the movement may be related to our gilt purchases 2 . More
importantly for the real economy, sterling investment-grade corporate bond spreads have
fallen over three and a half percentage points since the start of Quantitative Easing (Chart 4).
And equity prices have risen by almost a half, the fifth largest increase in a six-month period
over the past three hundred years (Chart 5). Accompanying this, UK companies have issued
over £60 billion worth of bonds and equities since January, compared with an annual
average of around £40 billion in recent years (Chart 6). Moreover, the spread between the
three-month interbank rate over expected Bank Rate, which had been unusually elevated
during the crisis, particularly after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, has fallen by almost 1½
percentage points and is now more or less back to pre-crisis levels (Chart 7).
All this suggests that Quantitative Easing is having the expected effects on the economy.
However, there may also be other reasons why asset prices have recovered in recent
months. Early in the year, there were considerable fears that the recession would continue to
deepen, whereas it now seems that activity here and elsewhere has probably troughed, so
some of the worst downside risks look unlikely to crystallise. And asset prices have been
rising not only here, but elsewhere, though that could reflect the aggressive monetary policy
measures adopted by other central banks too.
Moreover, the ultimate aim of the policy is to get the annual rate of growth of nominal
spending in the economy back to the 5% or so that it averaged during the first decade of the
Monetary Policy Committee’s existence and which is consistent with inflation at target and
growth at trend. In contrast, over the past year, nominal spending has fallen by roughly 5%
(Chart 8). The £175 billion of asset purchases has been calibrated with this in mind, though it
will be some while yet before we know how effective the policy has been in achieving the
objective.
Indeed, the truth is that we will probably never know exactly how effective the policy of
Quantitative Easing has been, for the simple reason that we can never know with precision
what would have happened in its absence. My only confident prediction is that academic
economists and their PhD students will be poring over the topic for decades to come.
To conclude, I want to return to some accounting issues. As I noted earlier, the Asset
Purchase Facility is set up as a separate entity, indemnified by the Treasury. The Bank is
committed to transparency about its operations, and we will be publishing annual accounts
for the Asset Purchase Facility, drawn up in accordance with established international
accounting principles.
The Asset Purchase Facility receives coupon payments from the government on the gilts it
holds, as well as some income from its small holding of corporate assets. The Asset
Purchase Facility also pays interest at Bank Rate to the Bank of England on the loan used to
buy the assets. At present, the average coupon on the purchased gilts is around 5%, which
substantially exceeds Bank Rate at 0.5%. Consequently the net interest income of the Fund
is positive. But international accounting principles dictate that the assets on the balance
sheet of the Asset Purchase Facility are also marked to market. Since gilt prices are highly
sensitive to movements in discount rates, it is quite plausible that falls in the prices of gilts as
a result of any future increase in discount rates will leave the Asset Purchase Facility
accounts in deficit overall.
The question is: Does this matter? At first sight, any loss on the Asset Purchase Facility
would represent a cost to the taxpayer, given the Treasury indemnity. But of course the gilts
held in one part of the public sector, the Asset Purchase Facility, are just a liability of the rest
of the public sector. In the accounts for the rest of the public sector, there must therefore be

2

The ECB has undertaken no such purchases of government debt, while the Federal Reserve’s purchases of
US Treasuries represent a much smaller fraction of the market.

BIS Review 126/2009

3

offsetting interest flows, as well as corresponding capital gains or losses, at least if those
accounts were also to be marked to market. So gilt price movements necessarily all wash out
once the public accounts are compiled on a consistent basis, at least so long as the assets
are retained within the public sector 3 .
We do not, however, expect to retain all the purchased assets in the Asset Purchase Facility
to maturity. At some stage, as the recovery proceeds, the Monetary Policy Committee will
need gradually to remove the large monetary stimulus that we have imparted to the
economy, otherwise we will be in danger of overshooting our 2% inflation target. That
monetary tightening will take the form of some combination of a higher level of Bank Rate
and asset sales from the Asset Purchase Facility to the private sector. The process of selling
off the gilts can then be expected to push gilt yields back up towards where they would have
been in the absence of the Quantitative Easing programme. When the Asset Purchase
Facility is finally run down, won’t the closing accounts tell us about the benefits or costs of
the programme?
The answer to this is: No. The first point to make is that the aim of Quantitative Easing and
the Asset Purchase Facility is to help the Monetary Policy Committee achieve its
macroeconomic objective, namely hitting the Government’s inflation target without generating
undue volatility in output. The accounts of the Asset Purchase Facility are not designed to
address these overall macroeconomic costs or benefits, which instead requires an
assessment of the impact of Quantitative Easing on demand and inflation. As I have already
noted, this is a difficult issue which is likely to keep researchers busy for many years to
come.
Second, even if one were interested in the rather narrower issue of the impact of Quantitative
Easing on the public finances, whether the Treasury ends up with a profit or a loss from the
Asset Purchase Facility represents only a small part of the picture. Gilt yields will be lower
than they would otherwise have been during the period that they are held in the Asset
Purchase Facility, so reducing the cost of financing a given budget deficit. This needs to be
factored into any calculation of the implications for the public finances. Rather more
significantly, Quantitative Easing is intended to boost spending and activity. In the process, it
should raise tax revenues and reduce benefit payments. And, unless Quantitative Easing
proves to be largely ineffective, this effect is likely to dominate the other elements of the
calculation.
Finally, it is worth noting that normal monetary policy, conducted by varying Bank Rate, also
generally affects both gilt yields and activity. Consequently, it too has an influence on the
public finances, including through the Bank’s balance sheet. Yet we usually do not try to
conduct such an exercise. The success of policy is instead judged by whether the
macroeconomic objectives are met.
The moral from all this is one that will be all too familiar to you as accountants, though
perhaps one that sometimes gets forgotten by consumers of accounting statements, namely
that the appropriate way to frame accounts depends on how they will be used and what
questions are being asked. The Asset Purchase Facility accounts may tell us the scale of
gains or losses on the Asset Purchase Facility portfolio narrowly considered, but will miss the
impact on the public finances from higher activity and lower financing costs and fail to tell us
anything about it macroeconomic effectiveness. The rise in asset prices and the recovery in
confidence since the start of the Quantitative Easing program have been significant. We
cannot identify precisely how much of this is a direct result of Quantitative Easing, and hence
the scale of the boost to tax revenues. I have no doubt that this issue will continue to be
debated for years to come, and that some sceptics may remain unconvinced. But even a
sceptic should acknowledge that the net accounting gain or loss on the Asset Purchase

3

4

Of course that is not true of holdings of corporate assets.

BIS Review 126/2009

Facility provides an incomplete measure of the impact of Quantitative Easing on the
economy and on the public finances.
Thank you.

BIS Review 126/2009

5

Chart 1 – The Bank of England’s balance sheet

Liabilities
£ billions

Other liabilities
Short-term open market operations, drain

300
Lehm an

APF Phase II

Reserve Balances
Foreign currency public securities issued

250

Cash ratio deposits
Notes in circulation

200

150

100

Assets

50

£ billions 0
Mar-07 Jun-07 Sep-07 Dec-07 Mar-08 Jun-08 Sep-08
Mar-09
Jun-09
Sep-09
LehmDec-08
an APF
Phase
II
Other assets
300
Loan to APF
Longer-term sterling reverse repo

250

Short-term open market operations, lending
Ways and Means advances to HM Government

200

Bonds and other securities acquired via market
transactions
150

100

50

0
Mar-07 Jun-07 Sep-07 Dec-07 Mar-08 Jun-08 Sep-08 Dec-08 Mar-09 Jun-09 Sep-09

6

BIS Review 126/2009

Chart 2 – Gilt yields

Feb IR
Pub.

March
MPC

May
MPC

August
MPC

per cent
6
5

20-year
10-year

4

5-year

3
2

3-year
1
0
Jan
2009

Apr

Jul

Oct

Chart 3 – Gilt-OIS spreads

basis points
40
US
20
0
-20

Euro Area

-40
UK

-60
-80

Mar
2009

BIS Review 126/2009

Jun

Sep

7

Chart 4 – Sterling investment grade corporate bond spreads

Basis points
800

March
MPC

700

Dollar

600
500

Ste rling
400
Euro

300
200
100
0

Aug Nov Feb
2007
08

May

Aug

Nov

Feb
09

May

Aug

Chart 5 – UK equity prices
4000

FTSE All -Share

3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

8

BIS Review 126/2009

Chart 6 – UK PNFC’s Cumulative equity and debt issuance

70
average 2003-2008
60
2009

40

£ bns

50

30
20
10
0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug Sep

Oct

Nov Dec

Chart 7 – International 3-month LIBOR-OIS spreads

Basis points
400
Sterling
US dollar
Euro

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr
2007
08
09
10

BIS Review 126/2009

9

Chart 8 – Nominal GDP and broad money growth
percentage changes oya
20
M4-Intermediate OFCs

15

10

5
GDP
0

-5

-10
1987

10

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

BIS Review 126/2009

Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to Scottish business
organisations, Edinburgh, 20 October 2009.
*

*

*

Two years ago Scotland was home to two of the largest and most respected international
banks. Both are now largely state-owned. Sir Walter Scott would have been mortified by
these events. Writing in 1826, under the pseudonym of Malachi Malagrowther, he observed
that:
“Not only did the Banks dispersed throughout Scotland afford the means of
bringing the country to an unexpected and almost marvellous degree of
prosperity, but in no considerable instance, save one [the Ayr Bank], have
their own over-speculating undertakings been the means of interrupting that
prosperity”.
Banking has not been good for the wealth of the Scottish – and, it should be said, almost any
other – nation recently. Over the past year, almost six million jobs have been lost in the
United States, over 2½ million in the euro area, and over half a million in the United
Kingdom. Our national debt is rising rapidly, not least as the consequence of support to the
banking system. We shall all be paying for the impact of this crisis on the public finances for
a generation.
The United Kingdom faces two fundamental long-run challenges. First, to rebalance the
economy, with more resources allocated to business investment and net exports and fewer
to consumption. That is consistent with the need – now widely accepted – to eliminate the
large structural fiscal deficit and to raise the national saving rate. It is part of a need for a
wider rebalancing of domestic demand in the world economy away from those countries that
borrowed and ran current account deficits towards those that lent and ran surpluses.
Second, both the structure and regulation of banking in the UK need reform. Banks
increased both the size and leverage of their balance sheets to levels that threatened
stability of the system as a whole. They remain extraordinarily dependent on the public
sector for support. That was necessary in the immediate crisis, but is not sustainable in the
medium term.
These two challenges are interrelated. In creating the crisis, imbalances in the world
economy led to unusually low real interest rates and large net capital flows from the
emerging market economies to the developed world. That provided the fuel which an
inadequately designed regulatory system ignited to produce the financial firestorm that
engulfed us all. If our response to the crisis focuses only on the symptoms rather than the
underlying causes of the crisis, then we shall bequeath to future generations a serious risk of
another crisis even worse than the one we have experienced.
Tonight I want to focus on the second of those challenges – reform of the structure and
regulation of the banking system. Why were banks willing to take risks that proved so
damaging both to themselves and the rest of the economy? One of the key reasons –
mentioned by market participants in conversations before the crisis hit – is that the incentives
to manage risk and to increase leverage were distorted by the implicit support or guarantee
provided by government to creditors of banks that were seen as “too important to fail”. Such
banks could raise funding more cheaply and expand faster than other institutions. They had
less incentive than others to guard against tail risk. Banks and their creditors knew that if
they were sufficiently important to the economy or the rest of the financial system, and things
went wrong, the government would always stand behind them. And they were right.

BIS Review 129/2009

1

The sheer scale of support to the banking sector is breathtaking. In the UK, in the form of
direct or guaranteed loans and equity investment, it is not far short of a trillion (that is, one
thousand billion) pounds, close to two-thirds of the annual output of the entire economy. To
paraphrase a great wartime leader, never in the field of financial endeavour has so much
money been owed by so few to so many. And, one might add, so far with little real reform.
It is hard to see how the existence of institutions that are “too important to fail” is consistent
with their being in the private sector. Encouraging banks to take risks that result in large
dividend and remuneration payouts when things go well, and losses for taxpayers when they
don’t, distorts the allocation of resources and management of risk.
That is what economists mean by “moral hazard”. The massive support extended to the
banking sector around the world, while necessary to avert economic disaster, has created
possibly the biggest moral hazard in history. The “too important to fail” problem is too
important to ignore.
There are only two ways in which the problem can – in logic – be solved. One is to accept
that some institutions are “too important to fail” and try to ensure that the probability of those
institutions failing, and hence of the need for taxpayer support, is extremely low. The other is
to find a way that institutions can fail without imposing unacceptable costs on the rest of
society. Any solution must fall into one of those two categories. What does this mean in
practice?
Consider the first approach. To reduce the likelihood of failure, regulators can impose capital
requirements on a wide range of financial institutions related to the risks they are taking. This
is the current approach underpinned by the Basel regime. In essence, it makes banks build a
buffer against adverse events. It has attractions but also problems. First, capital
requirements reduce, but not eliminate, the need for taxpayers to provide catastrophe
insurance. Second, the “riskiness” of a bank’s activities and the liquidity of its funding can
change suddenly and radically as market expectations shift. This means that what appeared
to be an adequate capital or liquidity cushion one day appears wholly inadequate the next.
Indeed, the Achilles heel of the Basel regime is the assumption that there is a constant
capital ratio which delivers the desired degree of stability of the banking system. After the
experience of the past two years, and a decade or more in which capital ratios fell and
leverage ratios rose to historically unprecedented levels, banks need more capital to
persuade investors to fund them. A larger buffer gives new creditors greater comfort that
their claims will be met in future, without resort to the public purse. And rather than pay out
dividends or generous remuneration, banks should use earnings to build larger capital
buffers. But how much larger? We simply don’t know. A higher ratio is safer than a lower
one, but any fixed ratio is bound to be arbitrary.
One way of dealing with this problem is to require banks to take out insurance in the form of
“contingent capital”, that is capital in a form that automatically converts to common equity
upon the trigger of a threshold that kicks in before a bank becomes insolvent. If a bank’s
regulatory core tier 1 capital – common equity – remained above the threshold, nothing
would happen. But if the regulatory core tier 1 capital fell below the threshold then the
contingent capital would automatically be converted to common equity. When bank failures
impose costs on the rest of the economy, it is reasonable to insist that banks themselves
purchase a sufficient degree of insurance in the form of a large capital cushion available
automatically before insolvency.
Such contingent capital instruments are very different from instruments, such as
subordinated debt, which banks have been permitted to count as capital under the Basel
regime, but which do not provide a reliable capital buffer until too late – after the bank has
failed. So at present the taxpayer is providing capital that is exposed to future losses rather
than investors in debt-like capital instruments of a troubled bank. Whether investors would be
willing to provide contingent capital on the required scale would depend upon the price, but
at least the cost would fall where it belongs – on the banks.

2

BIS Review 129/2009

So the first approach to the “too important to fail” problem might be made to work with a
requirement for contingent capital. It is worth a try. But it has three drawbacks. First, banks
still have an incentive to take really big risks because the government would provide some
back-stop catastrophe insurance. Second, experience has shown that it is difficult to assess
risks of infrequent but high-impact events, and so it is dangerous to allow activities
characterised by such risks to contaminate the essential – or utility – services that the
banking sector provides to the wider economy. Both of these drawbacks mean that it is
almost impossible to calculate how much contingent capital would be appropriate. And a third
drawback is that the approach probably requires the extension of detailed regulation, and
especially a special resolution regime, to all institutions deemed “too important to fail” – or
could become “too important to fail” in the middle of a crisis – in order to prevent a bank
failure leading to conventional insolvency procedures. It remains to be seen whether that
scope would be easy to define beforehand. Failure to deal with the underlying problem draws
regulators deeper into murky waters.
The second approach rejects the idea that some institutions should be allowed to become
“too important to fail”. Instead of asking who should perform what regulation, it asks why we
regulate banks. It draws a clear distinction between different activities that banks undertake.
The banking system provides two crucial services to the rest of the economy: providing
companies and households a ready means by which they can make payments for goods and
services and intermediating flows of savings to finance investment. Those are the utility
aspects of banking where we all have a common interest in ensuring continuity of service.
And for this reason they are quite different in nature from some of the riskier financial
activities that banks undertake, such as proprietary trading.
In other industries we separate those functions that are utility in nature – and are regulated –
from those that can safely be left to the discipline of the market. The second approach
adapts those insights to the regulation of banking. At one end of the spectrum is the proposal
for “narrow banks”, recently revived by John Kay, which would separate totally the provision
of payments services from the creation of risky assets. In that way deposits are guaranteed.
At the other is the proposal in the G30 report by Paul Volcker, former Chairman of the
Federal Reserve, to separate proprietary trading from retail banking. The common element is
the aim of restricting government guarantees to utility banking.
There are those who claim that such proposals are impractical. It is hard to see why. Existing
prudential regulation makes distinctions between different types of banking activities when
determining capital requirements. What does seem impractical, however, are the current
arrangements. Anyone who proposed giving government guarantees to retail depositors and
other creditors, and then suggested that such funding could be used to finance highly risky
and speculative activities, would be thought rather unworldly. But that is where we now are.
It is important that banks in receipt of public support are not encouraged to try to earn their
way out of that support by resuming the very activities that got them into trouble in the first
place. The sheer creative imagination of the financial sector to think up new ways of taking
risk will in the end, I believe, force us to confront the “too important to fail” question. The
belief that appropriate regulation can ensure that speculative activities do not result in
failures is a delusion.
Separation of activities does not resolve all misaligned incentives. Where private sector
entities outside of the utility banking sector engage in a high degree of maturity
transformation on a scale that could have consequences for the rest of the economy, the
government would not want to stand aside when such an entity fails. That is the heart of the
matter. Maturity transformation reduces the cost of finance to a wide range of risky activities,
at least some of which are beneficial, but the implicit government guarantee means that the
true cost of that maturity mismatch does not, as it should, fall on those who receive the
benefits. The aim of policy should be to minimise or eliminate that subsidy. Separation of
activities helps not hinders that objective, not least because it is the mixture of activities that

BIS Review 129/2009

3

reduces the robustness of the system. Although there are no simple answers, it is in our
collective interest to reduce the dependence of so many households and businesses on so
few institutions that engage in so many risky activities. The case for a serious review of how
the banking industry is structured and regulated is strong.
By international standards UK banking is highly concentrated. There are four large UK
banking groups. Of these four, two are largely in state ownership and their assets are a
multiple of the assets of the next largest bank. As in the English Premier League, getting into
the top four will not be easy for those outside it. But in both cases I hope greater competition
will produce less rigidity in the composition of the top four.
Whichever approach to the “too important to fail” problem is adopted, there is growing
agreement that such financial institutions should, as I argued at the Mansion House in June,
be made to plan for their own orderly wind down – to write their own will. I welcome that, but
without separation of the utility from other components of banking it will be necessary to
develop detailed resolution procedures for a very wide class of financial institutions. The
options may turn out to be separation of activities, on the one hand, or ever increasingly
detailed regulatory oversight, with the costs that that entails for innovation in, and the
efficiency of, the financial system, on the other.
So far, I have discussed measures to ensure that the financial system can continue to
function when individual institutions find themselves in difficulty. But there are broader policy
goals relevant to financial stability. The crisis certainly suggests that there is a need for
additional policy tools that can (a) moderate the growth of the financial sector and (b) lean
against the macroeconomic effects of the credit cycle. The Bank is working with others to
explore such macro-prudential instruments, and we will be setting out our thinking in a
discussion paper and a speech by Paul Tucker later in the week. Given the difficulty of
applying such tools to overseas banks, their use in (a) is likely to be more productive than in
(b). The key point though is that parallel to the long-established role which monetary policy
plays in taking away the punch bowl just as the party gets going, so there is a role for the
central bank to use macro-prudential policy instruments for financial stability purposes by
turning down the music just as the dancing gets a little too wild.
As we focus on how to create a sound and stable financial system, we cannot neglect the
rest of the economy. Recent months have brought better news here. Around the world, the
sharp falls in output that occurred over the winter have largely come to an end, and business
and consumer confidence have improved somewhat. It is likely that in the second half of this
year, the UK economy will return to positive, if modest, growth. Financial markets have
improved, with banks finding it easier and less costly to access wholesale funding markets,
and in time this should ease lending conditions to households and businesses.
These developments are encouraging. But they need to be seen in context, and we should
be under no illusion that the path to a sustained recovery will be smooth and painless.
Output is still well below and unemployment well above their levels of a year ago, and are
likely to remain so for sometime. To keep inflation close to the 2% target, monetary policy
tries to keep a balance between overall demand and supply. Judging that balance, given an
impaired banking sector and the likelihood of a significant fiscal tightening over the next few
years, is particularly difficult.
At the moment, inflation is 1.1%. Many have forgotten that only a year ago it reached 5.2%. It
is likely that inflation will remain volatile over the coming year. It will pick up over the next few
months reflecting higher petrol prices, recent falls in sterling and the reversal of the cut in
VAT. Looking through these short-run factors, however, inflation will be determined by the
path of money spending relative to the supply capacity of the economy. Over the past year
money spending, which normally expands at around 5% a year, has fallen by 5%. That is
already pulling down on inflation and will continue to do so until spending recovers. To put
money spending back on a desirable trajectory is likely to require a pick up in the growth rate

4

BIS Review 129/2009

of broad money in the economy. That is precisely what our asset purchase programme, by
injecting more money directly into the economy, aims to achieve.
In deciding when and by how much our present programme of asset purchases should be
either expanded or reduced, the Monetary Policy Committee will continue to base its decision
each month on a judgement of the action required to meet the 2% target for inflation.
Before the financial crisis, a generation of households and businesses had accepted that the
discipline of a market economy was the most promising route to prosperity. Uncomfortable
though it seemed, the importance of more flexible labour markets, greater competition in
product markets, regulation of privatised utilities and allowing unsuccessful businesses to
fail, came to be widely understood. Then, out of what must have appeared to many of you to
be a clear blue sky of economic stability, arose a financial firestorm that wreaked substantial
damage to the real economy, and we have not yet seen its full consequences. The case for
market discipline is no less compelling for banking than for other industries.
So I am sure that we can turn this crisis to our long-run advantage by reviewing and
reforming the structure and regulation of banking. As Sir Walter Scott noted, the failure of the
Ayr Bank in 1772 “was a terrible [warning], and has been so well attended to in Scotland …
forcing a capital on the district could only lead to wild speculation, instead of supporting solid
and promising undertakings”. Of the bankers themselves, Scott recognised that, while the
majority were “good men”, “there may have been, among so numerous a body, men of a
different character, fishers in troubled waters, capitalists who sought gain not by the
encouragement of fair trade and honest industry, but by affording temporary fuel to rashness
or avarice”.
If unsustainable capital flows provided the fuel and an inadequately designed regulatory
system ignited the fuel, the past two years have shown how dangerous it is to let bankers
play with fire. This is not a question of blame – as Sir Walter rightly said, the majority in the
industry are “good men” and women. It is a matter of the incentives they face. To protect our
genuinely successful financial centres – of which Edinburgh is clearly one – reform of
banking is essential. With that, I am confident that we will have attended to our terrible
warning and our varied and internationally competitive financial services industry will thrive.

BIS Review 129/2009

5

Paul Tucker: The debate on financial system resilience –
macroprudential instruments
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England,
at Barclays Annual Lecture, London, 22 October 2009.
*

*

*

What stage have we reached in the current financial and economic crisis?
The stage where the most hideous macroeconomic nightmare – a second Great Depression
revisited – is now probably remote but where the outlook remains highly uncertain by any
normal standard.
Where the banking system is recovering, but where some big UK (and overseas) banks have
a lot left to fix. And where there has been real progress with many policy initiatives to make
the international financial system more resilient in future, but where perhaps some of the
biggest issues remain unresolved, even incompletely articulated.
After some scene setting, I will address one of those issues this evening: whether there
might be macroprudential instruments that could lean against and preserve banking system
resilience in the face of credit boom and bust. I will also provide an update on international
plans for banks to produce recovery and resolution plans, known here as Living Wills.
The macrobackdrop and the credit system
At the beginning of this year, 1 I thought it would take until the autumn at least to tell whether
the economy was going to lurch downwards into a spiral of falling prices, rising real debt
burdens, generally enfeebled banks and falling output. While absolutely nothing can be
definitively ruled out, that nightmare now seems unlikely. I shall weigh that in my own policy
considerations, as for me the size of the massive monetary stimulus has partly been
designed to insure against that catastrophe risk. So a key question over the coming period
will be whether or not conditions are developing where some of that insurance could be
withdrawn, consistent with leaving policy highly stimulative. 2 But the economy has in actual
fact been very weak, with output falling and unemployment rising. The policy debate in the
months ahead therefore will turn, as more usually, on the broad outlook for the risks around
inflation over the medium term. That will depend on the data and, in particular, whether the
data and surveys about real activity and demand come more closely into line, here and
overseas. One of the biggest questions is whether, given the policy stimulus, recovery will be
anaemic or whether we can attain the above-trend growth needed to absorb the slack in the
economy necessary to ameliorate downward pressures on inflation. This will be at the heart
of the quarterly forecast round on which the MPC is just embarking. And it could hardly
matter more. Anaemic demand growth would lead to inflation undershooting the target for a
period. And it would be likely to see firms continuing to shed labour, scrapping capital and
delaying new investment, adding to the hardships the crisis has already brought. But I fear,
however, that we may not be much clearer about the general trends in demand until at least
late spring/early summer next year. There are major uncertainties about global demand and
about domestic saving given the need for many households to strengthen their balance

1

See Tucker PMWT (2009c), “The State of the Markets: Four Issues”, at the Association of British Insurers
Biennial Conference, London.

2

For my thoughts on the idea of ‘insurance’ or ‘precautionary’ monetary policy settings, see Tucker PMWT
(2006b), “Reflections on Operating Inflation Targeting”, a speech at the Graduate School of Business,
University of Chicago, May 2006, (pp. 10-12).

BIS Review 134/2009

1

sheets over time. And, in particular, I doubt it will be clear before then whether or not the
financial system is sufficiently recovered to support what may well prove to be a more creditintensive phase of cyclical recovery.
The continuing uncertainties about credit supply underline just how much an effectively
functioning financial system matters to the real economy. That much has been demonstrated
beyond doubt by the massive measures taken here and elsewhere to prop the system up
when the vortex beckoned.
Those measures have rightly drawn attention to what for too long was a neglected issue: Too
Big To Fail – or, as we have also discovered, Too Interconnected, Too Complex to be
allowed to fail in the way of an ordinary business. Like all truly big policy questions, this is a
partly social question. It just cannot be acceptable that the downside from excessive risk
across the financial system as a whole falls to the general taxpayer, to households and firms
throughout the economy, if the upside is enjoyed by a narrower group of shareholders and
managers. This is not just an issue of economic efficiency – of the allocation of resources –
and of leaning against the risk of even bigger crises down the road, but also of social justice.
That is why the debate has attracted so much interest. But I hope I can persuade you that
the Too Big To Fail problem matters to bankers too. Because the Lehman case
demonstrates that in a democracy, political constraints are uncertain and so even Too Big To
Fail firms can sometimes be allowed to fail. Banks need a system in which they are better
protected against mismanagement by their peers.
The debate calls for technocratic solutions to be laid out, but choice amongst those solutions
should be understood and accepted by society at large. And the solution needs to be an
international one. It is therefore good news that the G20 has commissioned work from the
Financial Stability Board on the Too Big To Fail issue.
So the stakes are high. By the lights of our successors, we are bound to get it wrong, but can
we get to the right ballpark?
Reforms to the “how” approach to the banking system oversight
The Governor of the Bank said earlier this week that we face a choice between an overhaul
of the regulatory regime and directly altering the structure of the banking system. As earlier
policymakers would have put it, this is a choice between, on the one hand, regulating what
banks and other financial firms can do and, on the other hand, leaving open the scope of
what they may do but regulating and supervising how they do it.
Since the thoughts on macroprudential instruments I shall go on to outline this evening are
based on something like the existing structure of the banking system persisting, I shall briefly
recap what I have said in a series of speeches earlier this year about the current reform
agenda. 3
The three necessary planks are re-regulation and a return to supervision; for the first time,
agreeing effective resolution plans with banks and any other key firms; and, I would hope, a
clear Capital of Last Resort regime designed to avoid perverse incentives.

3

2

See “Remarks by Paul Tucker”, panel session at The FSA’s Turner Review Conference, 27 March 2009, “The
Repertoire of Official Sector Interventions in the Financial System: Last Resort Lending, Market-Making, and
Capital”, Tokyo, 28 May 2009, and “Regimes for Handling Bank Failures: Redrawing the Banking Social
Contract”, at the British Bankers’ Association Annual International Banking Conference: Restoring Confidence
– Moving Forward, 30 June 2009. Traditionally, in exchange for being allowed to profit from taking risks
inherent in providing liquidity, or monetary and credit services to the economy, banks have been subject to:
prudential regulation; given access to liquidity insurance at the central bank; and required to finance industrywide insurance schemes. Those have been the key elements of the social contract for banking. This series of
speeches explored in more detail how those components of the social contract need to be redesigned.

BIS Review 134/2009

On regulation, as Adair Turner has said, it is clear that firms need to hold more capital; and,
as the Governor emphasised earlier this week, that that capital needs to be proper, lossabsorbing capital. It is equally clear that banks need to hold a portfolio of high-quality
liquidity; that there should be no compromise about what counts as such liquidity; and that
any banks thinking a decent treasury policy involves holding the bonds of other banks are
way off-beam. That much has pretty well been agreed by international policymakers. The
numbers remain to be set.
Just as important is the necessity of reviving supervision. By that, I do not mean checking
compliance with rules after the fact, punishing breaches; punishing offenders does not bring
back to life a bank or the customer businesses that have collapsed with it. I mean forwardlooking judgments about the prudence of a firm’s management and the resilience of its
business. The FSA under Hector Sants have been saying much the same thing, and it was
what an earlier generation focused on most. It involves supervisors making judgments; and,
no doubt, occasionally judgments that individual banks find unwelcome. They need to cover
competence. But also the adequacy of liquidity portfolios and the reasonableness of asset
valuations; over the decades too many banks around the world have failed after they
reporting apparently healthy ratios. Not a new lesson. But a vital issue is whether we are
ready, today, collectively to back an approach based on judgments rather than on enforcing
a book of detailed rules? If we are to tolerate supervisors where necessary substituting their
judgment for that of managers and boards, then commentators, appeal tribunals and even
parliamentarians will need to give supervisors the benefit of the doubt occasionally. Of
course, such judgments need to be grounded and reasoned.
But we need to go further than this. Today, there is a realisation that it is not enough to look
solely at individual firms atomistically. The resilience of the system in the face of seriously
adverse disturbances – whether from the real economy or from within the financial system –
depends heavily on common exposures and interconnectedness. In a way, this is another reremembering. I am fond of quoting the following from a speech by George Blunden, a former
Deputy Governor and the first chairman of the Basel Committee in the mid-1970s, gave over
twenty years ago:
“Supervisory standards are set with an eye to protecting [banks] from
problems which could be created by wider, systemic developments. A bank
may consider a course of action it wishes to take to be acceptable – as it
may well be in a limited context. But the same course might, if widely
copied by other banks, have unfortunate effects on the banking system as
a whole. It is part of the supervisors’ job to take that wider, systemic view
and sometimes to curb practices which even prudent banks might, if left to
themselves, regard as safe.” 4
A number of things flow from this core insight.
First, the central objective of prudential supervision is systemic stability. That is underlined
now that the UK has moved to a system of deposit insurance where 100% of retail deposits
up to £50,000 are protected. It is that which delivers consumer protection. Supervision
affects the incidence of calls on the insurance fund. And since such calls are met from levies
on the industry, that means supervision is in the business of containing such calls to
systemically manageable amounts.
Second, a systemic – or macroprudential – orientation is what lies behind the thought of
“systemic” add ons to capital and liquidity requirements for so-called “systemically significant”
banks. Personally, I do not much like the notion of a list of “systemically important firms”
because, as a previous generation of policymakers taught us, what proves to be systemic

4

Blunden G, “Supervision and Central Banking”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, August 1987.

BIS Review 134/2009

3

depends so very heavily on the circumstances. For example, it judged it safe to let Barings
fail because the causes were clearly idiosyncratic and, just as important, the financial waters
were calm. But essentially the same group of senior officials judged that it would not have
been safe, in the circumstances of the time, to leave unaddressed the distress amongst
fringe banks in the Secondary Banking Crisis of the mid-1970s, or amongst small banks in
the crisis of the early 1990s. In both cases, actions were taken to stop the problems
spreading to larger banks. But I do agree, of course, that banks are woven into the fabric of
the financial system in potentially dangerous ways should carry more capital and liquidity
than otherwise. That amounts to overturning a consensus that, assessed on an atomistic
basis, greater diversification in a bank’s risks is a sufficient reason for lower regulatory
requirements. The FSA published some thoughts on this area earlier today.
Third – and this is a major departure from the past – we need a regime that recognises that
inevitably regulation and supervision is flawed and, occasionally, will prove seriously wanting.
However good a country’s supervision, banks and other firms will fail. And they will fail in
circumstances that, at least with – and possibly without – hindsight, could have been
prevented. So it has been a mistake, over recent decades and in a number of countries, to
claim to have a regulatory framework that is not premised on zero failures when we lacked a
resolution regime that could cope with failures of even quite simple banks. In the UK, this
was cruelly exposed in August 2007 when Northern Rock failed, denting confidence in UK
mortgage banks generally.
That is the backdrop to the suggestion, stressed by the Governor earlier this week, that the
market should explore whether banks can raise contingent capital from private sector
investors. Beyond that, we need an effective resolution regime.
The UK does now have a decent resolution regime for small and medium-sized banks, which
we used directly for the Dunfermline Building Society and indirectly in getting a few cases
satisfactorily worked through. More important for today, it is the origin of the Bank pushing
the “Living Wills” idea, which dovetailed with international conclusions about the horrendous
problems of managing cross-border crises. The G20 heads of government have made it
clear that something must be done about this. It is being pursued by the Financial Stability
Board, a grouping of regulators, central bankers and finance ministry officials drawn from the
G20 countries and a few other key centres.
Speaking as chair of the Financial Stability Board’s working group on the resolution of crossborder firms, I can update you on the work already in train. Basically for the top roughly 25
banks and dealers, the authorities will work with them over the next 6-9 months to produce
recovery and resolution plans. The effort will build on the existing supervisory colleges, but
typically at a more senior level, and involving resolution authorities and central banks as well
as line supervisors. After official level exchanges, there will be engagement with those firms,
also at a senior level (say group CFO). The desired outputs will cover two things. First,
recovery plans for “de-risking” a group where it can and should be maintained as a going
concern. Second, a resolution plan when a firm needs to be wound down and put to rest, but
with essential economic functions maintained somehow. The FSA has explained their
contribution to the exercise.
No one should think that this will be easy; or that anyone in the official sector is naïve about
that. It will, in fact, be formidably difficult. The process is, for that very reason, designed to
flush out the issues, so that they can be properly debated and reviewed. There will quite
probably be hard questions about the organisation of some banks; about which services
needed to be maintained; about conflicts between the insolvency laws and special resolution
regimes of different countries; about how losses can in the future credibly be made to fall on
wholesale creditors; and, maybe, about the issues confronting burden sharing amongst
national authorities if, notwithstanding these efforts, fiscal support nevertheless proves
unavoidable when an internationally active bank fails in the future. Over time, this could lead
to something of a revolution in the supervision of banks – because of the inducement to

4

BIS Review 134/2009

design regulatory arrangements to cater for circumstances in which supervision had failed to
avert distress.
Imagine that despite all the obstacles, we make terrific progress with recovery and resolution
plans over the next few years. To be clear, it is not that we can promise that yet: the work of
the regulators: internationally has just begun. Rather, the point is that even that would not be
enough. The community having finally recognised that we cannot rely wholly on regulation
and supervision, we must not now make the analogous mistake of thinking that we can rely
on resolution plans.
However good, those de-risking and wind-down plans will sometimes prove flawed. That is
why for some months I have been arguing for the need to articulate a framework for Capital
of Last Resort provision. We must not again find ourselves in a position where the authorities
in different countries are developing as they go along how capital support should be
provided: what triggers it, its terms, and who pays. I have aired the possibility of eventual
losses falling on the surviving banking system, as a way of avoiding burdening the general
taxpayer and as an incentive for firms to recognise and act upon their interest in the health of
the system as a whole. But the more important point is the need to have a plan. And of
course the fiscal support comes after drawings in any private sector provision of contingent
capital.
Banking and the credit system: might there be macroprudential instruments?
At this point, I should issue another caution: that however all those issues are resolved, the
banking-structure debate is resolved, I doubt they could prove sufficient to rule out bouts of
instability, even crises, in the future. That is because I am doubtful that the tendency to
excess can be curbed solely by addressing the circumstances of individual firms. Booms are
spurred by plausible illusions and collective-action problems.
The current crisis has, in my view, been at root a crisis of liquidity – of an over abundance of
liquidity in the upswing, succeeded by a drying up of liquidity during the crash.
Usually, material rises in asset prices are initially triggered by reasonable perceptions of a
favourable shift in fundamentals. In the latest episode, that plausibly included improvements
in monetary policy regimes, in the flexibility of the real economy, in the outlook for global
costs, and in enriched instruments for hedging and dispersing risks. But it is very hard for
anyone to gauge the extent of the warranted revaluation of asset prices. If investors and
shareholders extrapolate forward ex post windfall gains into forward-looking ex ante required
returns, funds and banks may be incentivised to increase risk in order to deliver.
In an environment of rising asset prices, continuing strong investor demand and high
volumes in primary and secondary markets, liquidity is typically abundant. Liquidity premia
fall, adding to the upward pressure on asset values. That liquidity may not in fact be resilient,
but it can easily look like it to market participants. And with the ability to fund and to manage
risk in the markets looking straightforward, financial firms feel they can relax the supply of
credit – to real economy borrowers and to each other.
When the music stops, almost whatever the trigger, four problems arise – at least. First,
some borrowers – households, firms and financial intermediaries – prove to be over
indebted. Second, it can be hard to tell who has fundamental problems and who does not:
the so-called Lemons Problem. 5 Third, some of the assumptions on which financial activity
has been predicated turn out to be (or are seen as being) invalidated; eg, in the current

5

Ingves S, “A Cure for Crises: Confidence, Confidence and Trust”, a speech at the Eurofi Forum, Gottenburg,
September 2009. Akerlof, George A, 1970 “The market for ‘Lemons’ Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol 84 (3), pp 488-500, August.

BIS Review 134/2009

5

crisis, the reliability of ratings of ABS. Fourth, the demand for liquidity rises, and its supply
falls back. Markets become less liquid. Rising liquidity premia and forced sales depress asset
values. Credit supply is reined in. A vicious circle is threatened by the excess leverage and
liquidity mismatch that have developed in the financial system during the upswing.
During that upswing, important contributory factors will typically have included illusions about
risk-adjusted returns; underestimating the extent to which buoyant conditions are being
driven by falling liquidity premia; and a sense that, if the bubble bursts, the central bank will
somehow be able to contain the spillovers. This amounts to “risk illusion”, which should
probably be as much debated as “money illusion” is in monetary economics. Separately,
there is a potent collective action problem in getting off the dance floor. Not a few senior
market participants felt from at least 2006 that financial risk was underpriced, and that
conditions in, for example, the leveraged loan market were silly. But they also had no
conviction about when, or indeed whether for sure, the music had to stop, and so feared
individually that stepping away from the dance “too early” would crystallise business risk, as
the dance would simply go on without them and their franchise would be undermined as
customers migrated to their competitors.
These seem pretty close to the circumstances that Federal Reserve Chairman William
McChesney Martin had in mind, over 50 years ago, when he talked about Taking Away the
Punchbowl just as the party gets going. An intervention of some kind is needed from
someone outside the dance.
Some commentators argue that the intervention should come via monetary policy. That as
well as steering the path of nominal demand in order to maintain low medium-term inflation
expectations, monetary policy should seek to tame the credit cycle. As MPC colleagues have
already argued publicly, 6 we are very doubtful about that. It is likely that much higher rates
would have been needed in the UK to choke off the credit boom, with the likely effect of
pushing the economy into quite a prolonged recession, with a persistent and substantial
undershoot of our inflation target. The business cycle and the credit cycle were simply not
closely aligned. That is not to say that monetary policy should not take into account risks to
the inflation outlook that accumulate slowly and with great uncertainty about when and how
they will crystallise. But it makes a compelling case that monetary policy is not sufficient on
its own. There are essentially two objectives here.
So there is a missing set of instruments. And the big question is whether a set can be
devised that stack up not only in theory but in practice; instruments that can be used in the
real world.
Having first flagged 18 months or so ago that the Bank would work on this general area,
earlier this year I set out four questions which the debate would need to address; 7 objectives,

6

See, Bean C. R “The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction”, Schumpeter Lecture at
the Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, Barcelona, August 2009 and “Some Lessons for
Monetary Policy from the Recent Financial Turmoil”, remarks at Conference on Globalisation, Inflation and
Monetary Policy, Istanbul, November 2008. Also Dale S, “Inflation Targeting: Learning the Lessons from the
Financial Crisis”, remarks at the Society of Business Economists’ Annual Conference, London, June 2009.

7

My remarks at the Institutional Money Market Funds Association Annual Dinner in London on 2 April 2008
included the following on macroprudential policy: “Looking ahead further, the big question will be whether the
authorities can tame the credit cycle without sacrificing the incentives to enterprise that are so important in a
dynamic economy. The debate about the micro regulation of banks will need to take account of whether or not
we can deliver that macroprudential objective. For too long, the debate has got sidetracked. Into whether we
can rely on monetary policy “mopping up” after bubbles burst. Or into whether monetary policy could be used
to control asset prices as well as doing its orthodox job of steering nominal trends in the economy, which I
should say can include taking account of prospective risks of inflation volatility over the medium term. Ideas
circulating already include minimum margin requirements or capital ratios that vary not only across
instruments or firms but also through time as credit conditions change. We need calmly to explore whether
there are also other possibilities. But let me make this absolutely clear: there are formidable obstacles to
finding a solution. In the monetary sphere, a regime of floating exchange rates allows individual countries to

6

BIS Review 134/2009

instruments, whether the instruments would be operated under a rule or discretionary
judgments, and whether it was feasible for one country to attempt to employ such
instruments in a world of freely flowing capital. I will sketch our preliminary views on those
questions. The Bank will publish a Discussion Paper, going deeper than I can today, over the
next few weeks. We do not have all the answers and I must stress that we are not in
advocacy mode, but we have reached the point where we should like to try to inject some
further thoughts into the debate.
(a)

Objectives

A few generations ago, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Martin (of the Punchbowl)
described how the Fed approached the task it had been given by Congress in 1934, in the
wake of the Great Crash, to set minimum margin requirements for loans to purchase
security:
“The task of the Board, as I see it, is to formulate regulations with two
principal objectives. One is to permit adequate access to credit facilities for
securities markets to perform the basic economic functions. The other is to
prevent the use of stock market credit from becoming excessive. The latter
helps to minimise the danger of pyramiding credit in a rising market and
also reduces the danger of forced sales of securities from undermargined
accounts in a falling market.” 8
Today’s task is somewhat broader, focused not just on securities markets, but on the stability
of the banking system as a whole and on maintaining, through otherwise severe economic
disturbances, the essential services banks provide to the real economy. But it is instructive
that Chairman Martin focused on the risks of “pyramiding credit”.
In big picture terms, candidate objectives include quelling asset price bubbles; credit growth;
and strengthening the resilience of the banking system during credit booms. We are minded
to favour the third – dynamic resilience of the banking system.
Why not asset price bubbles? Essentially because we are doubtful that financial stability is
liable to be threatened by exuberance in asset markets unaccompanied by excess credit
growth and indebtedness. It is the impact of falling asset prices on an over-levered and
liquidity-stretched financial system that imperils the provision of essential financial services.
A necessary condition for a pervasive financial system problem is weakness amongst
financial firms. The late-90s tech bubble is arguably instructive in this respect. The collapse
of dot.com shares obviously caused a lot of volatility, but it was the wave of defaults on
telecom debt that threatened banking stability. 9
Why not then cast the objective solely in terms of credit growth? Essentially for three
reasons. First, a macroprudential instrument will alter the terms on which credit is supplied by
the banking sector, but the resulting growth of credit will depend on demand conditions,
which lie beyond the direct reach of the macroprudential instruments I shall go on to discuss.

pursue their own domestic monetary objectives. But in a world in which capital flows freely, local attempts to
control the pace of credit creation, particularly within the financial system, may not work. All of that will need to
be thought through. But first we need to concentrate on the immediate challenges”. The four questions are
sketched out in more detail on pages 7-9 of my remarks at the Turner Review Conference.
8

Chairman Martin’s testimony before the US Senate Committee on Banking and Currency, 84th Congress, 1955,
discussed by Paul H Kupiec of the FRB, April 1997, “Margin Requirements, Volatility, and Market Integrity”,
quoting from Moore, Thomas (1966) “Stock Market Margin Requirements”, Journal of Political Economy, vol
74, No 2, pp 158-167.

9

The Bank of England’s June 2000 Financial Stability Report highlighted the risks to the financial sector of the
heavy debts taken on by telecoms firms to finance purchases of licences.

BIS Review 134/2009

7

Second, and again anticipating part of my later remarks, the residents of industrialised
countries are free to borrow from abroad, so total credit growth may lie beyond the control of
national authorities. There is no good reason to turn our backs on free flowing capital. Third,
a “dynamic resilience” objective would not leave credit conditions untouched.
“Dynamic resilience of the domestic banking sector” should, by contrast, be something
national authorities can influence. A required increase in banks’ capital resources or liquidity
during a period of exuberance would be likely to act, in degree, as a circuit-breaker on
domestic credit supply. So there would be an effect on credit conditions, and so plausibly
some indirect taming of the credit cycle during the upswing. And, crucially, during the
subsequent downswing, the macro-prudential dial could be relaxed where necessary to lean
against the risks of a perverse downward spiral. A broadly symmetric approach would be
important. Its feasibility would depend on there being appropriate minimum capital
requirements in the first place for normal conditions. That is part of the Basel agenda.
So, on this view, the mandate or mission could be expressed in terms of ameliorating the
impairment of banking system resilience that typically occurs during credit booms. It would
probably be hard to achieve that without influencing domestic credit-supply conditions, in
booth the boom and contraction phases.
(b)

Possible instruments: capital requirements, risk weights and haircuts

There are two dimensions to pursuing this objective. One is making the system more resilient
in the face of severe shocks by acting on its inter-connectedness. The other is seeking to
adjust the capital and liquidity resources of the system during the up and downswings of the
credit cycle; that is to say, over time. Internally, we refer to these as the “cross-sectional” and
“time-series” dimensions. I am going to focus mainly on the latter this evening.
Work is already underway in Basel to reduce the pro-cyclical properties of the Second
Capital Accord and to encourage dynamic provisioning against expected credit losses. On
the face of it, that seems unlikely to be enough to deliver a “dynamic resilience” objective in
the terms I have described, as it would not directly address stress scenarios. That is a point
of departure for the wider debate on extra instruments.
Much of the existing public commentary starts from an assumption that any such instrument
should be variation in required minimum capital ratios over the course of the credit cycle.
We are currently doubtful about that. But we agree that macroprudential instruments directed
broadly at taming the credit cycle will be functions of – dare I say, derivatives of – micro
prudential requirements on capital and liquidity. That is because, as I have discussed, the
central vulnerabilities in the financial system, and the mechanisms through which it can
amplify the credit and business cycles, are leverage (inadequate capital) and maturity
mismatch (inadequate liquidity). Today, I shall focus almost entirely on the macroprudential
deployment of capital requirements. That is largely because the microprudential toolkit for
liquidity regulation is still in its infancy and subject to international discussion.
So why are we doubtful about simply varying headline capital requirements through the credit
cycle? Imagine that the authorities judge that a boom in lending to (or related to) a particular
sector of the economy had become overly exuberant. To make it topical, assume that this
was lending to the shadow banking system (say conduits, SIVs etc). The authority raises the
minimum capital ratio by Xpp. The affected banks could respond in a number of very different
ways. This could include the perverse reaction of cutting lending to unexuberant parts of the
real economy, while continuing to lend on overly relaxed terms to, in this example, the
exuberant shadow banking system. That kind of thing really could happen if such lending
seemed to offer terrific returns.
What lies behind this problem is, of course, that quite often a credit boom is at least initially
concentrated in one or a few sectors of the economy. That being so, the appropriate
instrument needs to be able to work with a degree of granularity. Two options are changing

8

BIS Review 134/2009

capital-ratio risk weights on exposures to particular classes of borrower; and, second, varying
minimum collateral haircuts on secured lending. Since, by definition, the latter can apply only
to secured lending, the Bank has so far been giving more thought to operating on risk
weights.
Using risk weights as the instrument might also enable the authorities to address incipient
problems emerging from credit exposures held in banks’ Trading Books and off-balance
sheet exposures as well as in standard loan books. For example, in the upswing of the latest
credit cycle, it would have been helpful to withdraw the 0% weight on 364-day lines of credit,
which fuelled the shadow-banking system of conduits etc; and to have raised the weights on
super-senior credit exposures held in marked-to-market trading portfolios. (By the way, the
appropriate micro supervisory response would have been to ensure that the individual LCFIs
were in fact managing those holdings as trading positions. It seems that some were not.)
Of course, none of this would be straightforward. There would be a lot to be learned about
the transmission mechanism. And using risk weights as the instrument would require
judgments on the relative as well as absolute risks of different types of exposure. I must
stress, therefore, that we are outlining these thoughts precisely so that they can be explored
and challenged. In particular, we should think about whether a macroprudential toolkit might
sensibly include variations in minimum haircuts as well as in risk weights. An eclectic
approach should not be ruled out.
(c)

Rules or discretion?

As I have said on a previous occasion, we are doubtful that macroprudential instruments
could be operated by a rule. To steer the banking system towards increasing its resilience to
incipient problems in a stretched sector, a whole series of judgments would have to be made.
Whether the rate of credit growth seemed excessive; whether terms were overly lax; or
whether the “bubble bursting” would materially damage banks. That would call for
assessments of the levels of indebtedness, of banking system exposures, of the broad
probabilities of those exposures turning sour, and of whether herding in the market might be
driving the system into an ever more precarious position. Rapid growth in debt does not of
itself signify over indebtedness; and default does not necessarily materially impair lenders’
resilience. One possible way of thinking about this is that the authorities could be guided by
top-down stress tests of the effects on the banking system of various adverse scenarios
potentially affecting different groups of borrowers and exposures. In very broad terms, this
would be akin to systematically applying Pillar II-type judgments under the Basel regime to
banks in general. It would share with the Pillar II element of micro-prudential regulation a
focus on circumstances that warranted a capital charge different from the Pillar 1 minimum.
But it would differ in a number of important respects. First, the instrument would be applied to
all banks in the jurisdiction. Individual banks would be affected differently according to the
scale of their holding of the exposures for which a risk-weight had been varied, rather than
on the basis of micro supervisory judgments about each bank’s particular circumstances.
Second, for that reason, the calibration would depend on the position of the system as a
whole, including its weakest systemically significant links in the context at the time, rather
than the idiosyncratic circumstances of each firm. Third, whereas in the micro-prudential
setting Pillar II always applies an add-on to the Pillar I minimum, a macroprudential authority
might reduce risk weights during the downswing in the credit cycle. Indeed, it would be
important that the instruments could be used symmetrically. But the risk weights that might
be reduced would not necessarily be those that had been increased during the boom phase
of the credit cycle. That might well be inappropriate if those sectors were becoming
distressed. This would, of course, call for quite difficult practical judgments. Fourth, the
operation of the instrument would need macroeconomic as well as financial system inputs.
Thus, to the extent that top-down stress tests were employed as one input to the calibration,
these could not be a standard battery of mechanical scenarios. They would need to be
tailored to the risks around the outlook for the economy and the financial system. That would

BIS Review 134/2009

9

also entail judgments being made. Taking all that together, it seems to us implausible that
the instrument could be applied according to a rule. Instead, policymakers would need to
meet periodically to make difficult judgments faced with enormous uncertainty.
I should touch on, although I do not have time to elaborate tonight, on three consequences of
such an approach. First, this would be a data intensive endeavour. The macroprudential
authority would probably need information on sectors to which the banking system was
exposed going beyond anything that has been collected to date, particularly in the non-bank
financial sector. Whether that renders this kind of approach overly ambitious is part of what
we should all debate.
Second, in a regime involving judgments, the macroprudential authorities would need to
explain publicly the basis of their decisions and how they related to their mandate and
specified objectives. Moreover, as in the monetary policy sphere, transparency might
enhance the effectiveness of macroprudential instruments. That is because over time banks
(and other lenders) would develop an appreciation of the circumstances in which the
macroprudential toolkit might be deployed, requiring them to hold more capital or liquidity
against a build-up of exposures.
Third, the macroprudential authorities would need a deep and broad understanding of the
financial system. While the big picture story of the current crisis is clear ex post, recognising
it in advance would have required, amongst other things, looking under the bonnet of the
structured finance industry and elsewhere to see the obscure way in which leverage and
liquidity mismatches were accumulating. That would have helped an understanding of the
expansion of bank balance sheets. 10
(d)

Leakage

From the outset of this debate, I have stressed the hazards in trying to steer credit growth in
a world in which capital can flow freely across borders. Think of a case where the domestic
authorities increased the risk weight on mortgage lending. The measure would apply only to
banks headquartered here or operating out of a subsidiary. It would not apply to branches of
foreign-headquartered banks, still less to pure cross border activity. But it is easy to imagine
that, rather than borrowing from UK-domiciled banks, mortgage brokers could arrange for
households to borrow from a lender based overseas, or at least with the loan booked
overseas. In terms of the accumulation of debt in the sector concerned – in this hypothetical
case, housing – there might, after a time, be little or no effect. That would obviously not be
great for the risk of default by the borrowing sector concerned. But UK-based banks would
have been required to build their defences. That might mean that, other things being equal, if
and when the borrowing sector got into difficulty, UK-based banks would be less likely to
collapse under the strain of losses. If so, the damage to financial stability would be reduced,
and the eventual economic costs might plausibly be lower than otherwise; especially if those
UK banks were able to take up some of the slack created by withdrawal of credit supply by
foreign banks to sound UK borrowers.
It might, though, just be possible to go further. In the first place, a domestic authority
increasing capital or liquidity requirements due to on lending by its banks to a particular
sector could act as a signal to the home authorities of other, overseas banks. Plainly, it would
be important to share analysis with international peers, even if things went no further than
that. Transparency to the market would aid that dialogue. But it might be worth exploring
whether there could feasibly be some kind of more or less co-ordinated or co-operative
macroprudential response in some instances. This would entail risk weights being varied on

10

10

For a description of how banks used structured finance to try and transfer risk see, Tucker PMWT (2007a), “A
Perspective on Recent Monetary and Financial System Developments”, a speech at the Merrill Lynch
Conference for hedge funds, April 2007, (pp.8-10).

BIS Review 134/2009

the basis of both the economy of the borrowers and conditions in the home financial system
of the lenders, with the aim of at least avoiding conflicting policy responses. As such, it would
be a novel overlay on the Basel Concordat agreed thirty years ago for the division of labour
between home and host supervisors. This might usefully form part of the international
discussion on possible macroprudential instruments.
(e)

The cross-sectional dimension: interconnectedness

Finally, to round up, just a few thoughts on the other dimension to the macroprudential
challenge: the “cross-sectional” issue of interconnectedness. I have already applauded the
debate in Basel, and at the FSA, on developing a regime for supplementary capital
requirements for firms that are especially interwoven into the system. I would add only two
points this evening.
First, just as top-down stress testing could be a useful input to utilising the “time series”
instruments I have been outlining, so the “cross-sectional” add-ons would need to draw upon
judgments about how distress at a particular firm would ripple through the system. Stress
testing could be one useful part of that. But it would also require a deep knowledge of the
plumbing of the financial system – the way payments, settlements and collateral transfers
operate.
And so my second point is that the debate about how best to regulate the banking system
must not distract policymakers or practitioners from improving the plumbing, the
infrastructure of our markets. This crisis would have been unimaginably worse without
effectively collateralised payment systems, many over-the-counter derivative contracts and
central-counterparty clearing houses. Although progress in those areas proceed below the
radar of many, we must renew our emphasis on effective financial market infrastructure.
Conclusions
The current crisis has reminded everyone that our primary interest in regulating the banking
sector is the preservation of systemic stability and so of the vital services banks perform in
our economy and financial markets.
There are two great lessons from the crisis. One is that important banks can fail and so we
would be wise to have robust resolution regimes and plans. The second is that the financial
system is a system. One that contains complex and shifting inter-connections. And one that
can generate pronounced credit cycles, which even if they initially affect only asset values,
eventually can materially affect the real economy. This is why the macroprudential debate is
so important. It has been a long time coming. 11
This evening I have outlined some of the Bank’s current thinking on where it might be
feasible to develop a toolkit of useful macroprudential instruments. It is not a set of firm
recommendations. An open discussion is needed before anyone can reach that point. But I
hope it is a useful contribution. We plan to expand on it in a discussion paper over the next
few weeks.

11

The beginnings of the macroprudential debate can be traced back at least to Crockett, A (2000): “Marrying the
micro- and macroprudential dimensions of financial stability”, BIS Speeches, 21 September 2000.

BIS Review 134/2009

11

Andrew G Haldane: Banking on the state
Paper by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England,
and Mr Piergiorgio Alessandri, based on a presentation delivered at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago twelfth annual International Banking Conference on “The International
Financial Crisis: Have the Rules of Finance Changed?”, Chicago, 25 September 2009.
Contributions and comments were provided by Paul Doran, Marius Jurgilas, Samuel Knott, Salina Ladha, Ouarda
Merrouche, Filipa Sa, William Speller, Matthew Willison and Nick Vause.

*
1.

*

*

Introduction

Historically, the link between the state and the banking system has been umbilical. Starting
with the first Italian banking houses in the 13th century, banks were financiers of the
sovereign. Sovereign need was often greatest following war. The Bank of England was
established at the end of the 17th century for just this purpose, financing the war debts of
William III.
From the earliest times, the relationship between banks and the state was often rocky.
Sovereign default on loans was an everyday hazard for the banks, especially among states
vanquished in war. Indeed, through the ages sovereign default has been the single biggest
cause of banking collapse. 1 It led to the downfall of many of the founding Italian banks,
including the Medici of Florence.
As awareness of sovereign risk grew, banks began to charge higher loan rates to the
sovereign than to commercial entities. In the 15th century, Charles VIII of France paid up to
100% on war loans to Italian banks, which were at the same time charging Italian merchants
5-10%. 2 The Bank of England’s first loan to government carried an interest rate of 8% –
double the rate at which the Bank discounted trade bills.
For the past two centuries, the tables have progressively turned. The state has instead
become the last-resort financier of the banks. As with the state, banks’ needs have typically
been greatest at times of financial crisis. And like the state, last-resort financing has not
always been repaid in full and on time. The Great Depression marked a regime-shift in state
support to the banking system. The credit crisis of the past two years may well mark another.
Table 1 provides a snap-shot of the scale of intervention to support the banks in the UK, US
and the euro-area during the current crisis. This totals over $14 trillion or almost a quarter of
global GDP. It dwarfs any previous state support of the banking system. These interventions
have been as imaginative as they have large, including liquidity and capital injections, debt
guarantees, deposit insurance and asset purchase.
The costs of this intervention are already being felt. As in the Middle Ages, perceived risks
from lending to the state are larger than to some corporations. The price of default insurance
is higher for some G7 governments than for McDonalds or the Campbell Soup Company. Yet
there is one key difference between the situation today and that in the Middle Ages. Then,
the biggest risk to the banks was from the sovereign. Today, perhaps the biggest risk to the
sovereign comes from the banks. Causality has reversed.
State support is one side of the “social contract” between banks and the state. 3 State
regulation of banks is the other. Table 1 suggests that the terms of this social contract have

1

Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) provide an outstanding history of financial crises over the past 800 years.

2

Homer and Sylla (2005).

3

Tucker (2009).

BIS Review 139/2009

1

recently worsened. That should come as no surprise. At least over the past century, there is
evidence of a ratchet in the scale and scope of state support of the banking system (Section
2). Whenever banking crises strike, the safety net has bulged. Like over-stretched elastic, it
has remained distended.
What explains this ratchet? All contracts are incomplete. 4 Contractual relationships, like
personal ones, often break down due to commitment problems. Social contracts between the
state and the banks are no exception. This generates a time-consistency problem for the
authorities when dealing with crisis – a tendency to talk tough but act weak. This explains
historical hysteresis in the safety net (Section 3).
So what can be done? There are many reform proposals on the table. 5 Two sets of initiative
are discussed here: changes to the regulation of banks’ risk-taking; and changes to the terms
of the social safety net to improve its time-consistency. It is too early to know whether these
measures will be sufficient. But recent events suggest some mix of these measures is surely
necessary.
2.

Evolution in the banking safety net

The three longest standing state insurance devices for the banking system are liquidity
insurance, deposit insurance and capital insurance. These offer protection to different parts
of banks’ capital structure, respectively wholesale deposits, retail deposits and equity. So
how have risks to banks’ balance sheets – in effect, the “insurable interests” of the state –
evolved over time? And how, in turn, has this evolution shaped the design of the banking
safety net?
The UK provides a useful historical case study. Chart 1 plots UK banks’ balance sheet
against GDP since 1880. The ratio is flat for almost a century, at around 50%. Over this
period, banks’ assets grew roughly in line with money spending. But from the early 1970s,
this pattern changed dramatically. By the start of this century, bank balance sheets were
more than five times annual UK GDP. In the space of a generation, the insurable interests of
the state had risen tenfold.
By itself, this expansion of balance sheets need not imply that the state was bearing greater
implicit risk. For example, banks could have self-insured by holding larger buffers of capital
and liquidity. In practice, the opposite happened (Charts 2 and 3). Capital and liquidity ratios
have fallen secularly in the UK and US for over a century.
Since the start of the 20th century, capital ratios have fallen by a factor of around five in the
US and UK. Liquidity ratios have fallen by roughly the same amount in half that time. Taken
together, these balance sheet trends indicate a pronounced rise in banking system risk and
hence in potential demand for state insurance. They have also affected the returns required
by bank shareholders.
As banks moved up the risk spectrum, the return required by shareholders has predictably
increased. Between 1920 and 1970, the return on UK banks’ equity averaged below 10% per
annum, with low volatility of around 2% per year (Chart 4). This was roughly in line with risks
and returns in the non-financial economy.
The 1970s signalled a sea-change. Since then returns on UK banks’ equity have averaged
over 20%. Immediately prior to the crisis, returns were close to 30%. The natural bedfellow to
higher return is higher risk. And so it was, with the volatility of UK banks’ returns having
trebled over the past forty years.

4

Indeed, contract incompleteness is one of the reasons banks exist in the first place (Rajan (1998)).

5

See, for example, King (2009).

2

BIS Review 139/2009

This regime shift upwards in the risk and return profile of UK banks can be explained by the
fall in their capital ratios. Higher leverage boosts required returns on equity because it
simultaneously makes the banking system’s balance sheet more fragile. There is unlikely to
be a better case study of these dynamics at play than events over the past decade.
So how has the state’s safety net evolved in response? The element of the safety net with
the longest historical pedigree is liquidity insurance, typically provided by the central bank in
the form of last resort lending. The principles behind last resort lending were first articulated
by Henry Thornton at the beginning of the 19th century and were subsequently elaborated by
Walter Bagehot. 6
Last resort lending in practice was often rather less elegant than the theory. Writing at the
time of the 1825 banking crisis, Jeremiah Harman, Director of the Bank, described it thus:
“We lent [money] by every possible means and in modes we have never
adopted before; we took in stock on security, we purchased Exchequer
bills, we made advances on Exchequer bills, we not only discounted
outright, but we made advances on the deposit of bills of exchange to an
immense amount, in short, by every possible means consistent with the
safety of the Bank…Seeing the dreadful state in which the public were, we
rendered every assistance in our power.” 7
Chart 5 plots the Bank of England’s balance sheet in relation to GDP since 1830. Stripping
out the effects of the two World Wars, this ratio has declined fairly steadily, from around 15%
in 1830 to around 5% at the start of this century. Financial panics over this period did little to
interrupt the downward trend.
Events of the past two years have dramatically altered that picture. In relation to GDP, base
money in the UK has risen by a factor of four – easily the highest financial crisis multiplier
ever. 8 It has reached a peak last witnessed almost two centuries ago. Past liquidity crises
are foothills by comparison with recent Himalayan heights.
Measures of central bank balance sheet expansion under-estimate the scale of liquidity
support provided during this crisis. As in Harman’s time, there has been a widening of the
collateral taken by most central banks in their operations. 9 The taking of imaginative forms of
collateral has a history which predates central banking: in the 12th century, King Baldwin II of
Jerusalem secured a loan using his beard as collateral. Nonetheless, recent efforts are
probably unprecedented in scope.
Collateral swaps, typically not involving beards but often requiring haircuts, have also played
a significant role during this crisis. They too do not expand base money, but do liquefy banks’
balance sheets. And guarantees of wholesale liabilities have similarly served as an important
liquidity insurance device for a number of countries. Together, these two instruments have
totalled between 10% and 40% of GDP across the UK, US and euro-area.
Plainly, there has been a dramatic expansion in both the scale and scope of state liquidity
insurance to the banking system. This pattern has been repeated in the majority of recent
systemic banking crises. In a study of 42 systemic banking crises between 1970 and 2007,
Laeven and Valencia find peak liquidity provision of almost 30% of total deposits. Drastic
times clearly call for drastic measures. Harman’s description of last resort lending in 1825

6

Thorton (1802), Bagehot (1873).

7

Quoted in Bagehot (1873).

8

The sample ends before quantitative easing began, so base money growth is not affected by recent monetary
policy actions in the UK.

9

Committee on the Global Financial System (2008).

BIS Review 139/2009

3

would not look out of place today. Except, crucially, the decimal point would have changed
place.
Deposit insurance and capital insurance have a shorter history. Deposit insurance was first
introduced in the US in 1934, to protect retail depositors scorched by the experience of the
Great Depression. It failed to catch on internationally. By the early 1960s, the US was still the
only developed country with an explicit deposit insurance scheme. Since then, there has
been a steady rise in the number of adopting countries (Chart 6). By 2009, almost 100
countries globally had such a regime.
Typically, the introduction and extension of deposit insurance regimes has been a response
to banking crisis. This time’s crisis has been no exception. Australia and New Zealand have
both introduced deposit guarantee schemes. And more than forty countries have increased
the coverage limits of their existing schemes, including in the UK, US and Germany. In a few
countries, deposit insurance limits have temporarily been removed – for example, in
Germany and Ireland. In many others, they have been removed implicitly.
This, too, is a familiar pattern at crisis time. Laeven and Valencia find that coverage limits for
deposit insurance schemes on average increase fourfold in relation to GDP after systemic
crises. 10 As with liquidity insurance, there has been a secular expansion in the scope and
scale of deposit insurance.
Finally, explicit capital insurance of the banking system appears to have been a more recent
phenomenon. In the US, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation was established in 1932 at
the height of the Great Depression; it played a key role in recapitalising US banks through
injections of preferred stock. More recently, recapitalisation of the banks has accompanied
the banking crises in Scandinavia, Japan, Asia and Latin America.
Historically, capital injections into the UK banking system have tended to be small and
bespoke – for example, at the time of the secondary banking crisis in the 1970s and the
small banks crisis in the early 1990s (Table 2). 11 In terms of scale, capital injections during
this crisis knock these interventions into a cocked hat. Once again, the decimal place has
changed place. This pattern is replicated in studies of recent systemic banking crises. Since
the 1970s, capital injections to the banking system have averaged around 8% of GDP at
crisis time. 12
Taken together, this evidence paints a consistent picture: a progressive rise in banking risk
and an accompanying widening and deepening of the state safety net. There is a ratchet.
This ratchet is evidence of a policy time-consistency problem.
3.

Time-consistency and the banking safety net

What explains this time-inconsistency? A simple framework is developed to explain the
existence of, and ratchet in, the safety net. It focuses on the incentive structures facing
owners of banks and the risk strategies they pursue. The run-up to the present crisis
provides several examples of those incentives and strategies at work.
Take the payoff profile facing a bank shareholder. Assume that the sensitivity of the bank’s
assets to aggregate risk – in the language of finance, its beta – equals 0.1. So for every 10%
movement in the market as a whole, the bank’s assets move by 1%. Assume too that the
beta of the bank’s deposits is zero and that the bank has an equity capital ratio of 10%. While
arbitrary, these numbers are broadly plausible. Conveniently, under those assumptions the

10

Laeven and Valencia (2009).

11

Logan (2000).

12

Laeven and Valencia (op.cit.).

4

BIS Review 139/2009

beta of the bank’s equity equals one. Figure 1 shows the payoff profile facing owners of the
bank.
The return on a bank’s equity lies on a 45 degree line when market returns are positive.
Gains to shareholders are potentially unlimited. But the same is not true in bad states of the
world. The reason is limited liability. That constrains the losses of shareholders to around
zero. Losses beyond that point are borne by other parts of banks’ capital structure –
wholesale and retail depositors. Therein lies the problem.
If protection of depositors is felt to be a public good, these losses instead risk being borne by
the state, either in the form of equity injections from the government (capital insurance),
payouts to retail depositors (deposit insurance) or liquidity support to wholesale funders
(liquidity insurance). The gains risk being privatised and the losses socialised. Evidence
suggests this is a repeated historical pattern.
Socialised losses are doubly bad for society. Taxes may not only be higher on average. They
may also need to rise when they are likely to be most painful to taxpayers, namely in the
aftermath of crisis. So taxes profiles will be spiky rather than smooth and will spike when the
chips are down. This is the opposite to what tax theory would tells us was optimal. 13
So far, so bad. But it is about to get worse, for this tells only half the story. This is a repeated
game. State support stokes future risk-taking incentives, as owners of banks adapt their
strategies to maximise expected profits. So it was in the run-up to the present crisis. In
particular, five such strategies were clearly in evidence:
•

Higher leverage: The simplest way of exploiting the asymmetry of payoffs arising
from limited liability is to increase leverage. For example, if the capital ratio of the
hypothetical bank were to halve from 10% to 5%, the beta of the bank’s equity would
double (Figure 2). In that event, the imbalance between privatised gains (above the
zero axis) and socialised losses (below the zero axis) would increase. Private
investors would harvest more of the upside and export more of the downside.
There is clear evidence of this strategy being pursued over long sweeps of history
(Chart 2). Chart 7 looks at the behaviour of UK banks over the past decade; it plots
their leverage against the riskiness of their assets. UK banks migrated North-West
over the past ten years, with balance sheet expansion financed by higher leverage.
Because UK and European banks were not subject to any regulatory restriction on
simple leverage, there was no effective brake on this leverage-fuelled expansion.
Higher leverage fully accounts for the rise in UK banks’ returns on equity up until
2007. It also fully accounts for the subsequent collapse in these returns. The highleverage strategy pursued by UK and European banks rather effectively privatised
gains and socialised losses.

•

Higher trading assets: An alternative means of replicating the effects of higher
leverage is to increase the proportion of assets held in banks’ trading books. Trading
assets are marked to market prices, thereby increasing their sensitivity to aggregate
market fluctuations (beta). To illustrate, assume that a bank holds 90% of its assets
in the banking book (with a beta of zero) and the remainder in the trading book (with
a beta of one). That gives an asset beta of 0.1 and an equity beta of unity (Figure 1).
But if the size of the trading book is doubled to 20% of assets, this doubles the
equity beta of the bank (Figure 2).
Chart 8 plots a cross-section of global banks’ trading assets as a fraction of their
total assets against their leverage. It suggests that efforts to expand balance sheets
through higher leverage were focussed on trading assets. In the first part of this

13

Barro (1979).

BIS Review 139/2009

5

decade, rising asset prices delivered mark-to-market gains on banks’ expanding
trading assets. This boosted their profitability and returns on equity. As long as asset
prices rose, this created an Alice in Wonderland world in which everybody had won
and all had prizes.
But when asset prices fell, reality returned. The same institutions suffered enormous
mark-to-market trading book looses. Across global banks, trading book losses since
the start of the crisis total over $900bn. In a number of cases, these losses
necessitated state support. Trading book expansion also allowed banks to import
the upside and export some of the downside.
•

Business line diversification: A third strategy pursued by many financial institutions
in the run-up to crisis was diversification of their business lines. For banks
individually, this made sense. It helped reduce the idiosyncratic risk from individual
business lines. Pre-crisis, this strategy seemed the epitomy of sound banking.
In fact, it epitomised Keynes’ description of a sound banker: “one who, when he is
ruined, is ruined in a conventional and orthodox way with his fellows, so that no-one
can really blame him”. 14 Because, for risk across the system as a whole, this
strategy has systemically dangerous consequences. By increasing the similarity of
banks’ asset portfolios, it increases the system’s sensitivity to aggregate
fluctuations. Although diversification may purge idiosyncratic risk, it simultaneously
reduces diversity and thereby increases systemic risk. 15 It, too, increases the risk of
adversity being socialised and prosperity privatised.

•

High default assets: A fourth strategy for exploiting the asymmetry of equity payoffs
is to originate assets which themselves have asymmetric returns. High risk loans are
one example. These assets yield a high fixed payoff in good states of the world, but
in bad states default generating large losses. Because losses are bunched in the
tail, the result is that more of the gain is privatised and more of the loss socialised
(Figure 3).
This was the strategy pursued by US banks in the run-up to crisis. Unlike banks in
Europe, US banks were effectively constrained from expanding their balance sheet
by a regulatory leverage ratio. So instead they did the next worst thing: they sought
higher return on equity by increasing the riskiness of their asset pool. This explains
their venture into sub-prime and leveraged lending and various kinds of securitised
exotica.
Chart 9 looks at the leverage and risk positions of European versus US banks.
European banks lie in the North West, as they exploited the absence of a leverage
constraint to expand their balance sheets in search of higher return on equity. US
banks, by contrast, located themselves in the South-East with lower leverage but
higher risk per unit of assets. For US banks, this was a best response strategy for
boosting shareholder payoffs. When risk on these high-default assets materialised,
however, the result was the same as for European banks – deep losses, often
cushioned by the state.

•

Out-of-the-money options: The payoffs to high-risk lending can be replicated using
an alternative strategy of writing deep out-of-the-money options. This can be
achieved, for example, by selling protection in the CDS market. The writer of that
protection receives an insurance premium and thus a steady source of income in

14

Keynes (1931).

15

Haldane (2009), Beale et al (2009).

6

BIS Review 139/2009

good states of the world. Because of that, this strategy appears to generate “alpha”
– excess returns – during the good times.
In fact, this strategy is a wolf wrapped in sheep’s clothing; it is beta dressed up as
alpha. In the event of a bad state of the world – default by the reference entity in a
CDS context – the writers of the insurance suffer a significantly negative payoff,
eliminating the apparent alpha earned in good states (Figure 3). This was, in effect,
the AIG strategy. AIG is believed to have written around $1.0 trillion of CDS
protection. This strategy delivered large apparent “alpha” returns during the disco
years. But when the music ceased and true beta was revealed, AIG required state
support of around $180bn.
These five strategies are the latest incarnation of efforts by the banking system to boost
shareholder returns and, whether by accident or design, game the state. For the authorities,
it poses a dilemma. Ex-ante, they may well say “never again”. But the ex-post costs of crisis
mean such a statement lacks credibility. Knowing this, the rational response by market
participants is to double their bets. This adds to the cost of future crises. And the larger these
costs, the lower the credibility of “never again” announcements. This is a doom loop.
The “St Petersburg paradox” explains how a gambling strategy which starts small but then
doubles-up in the event of a loss can yield positive (indeed, potentially infinite) expected
returns. Provided, that is, the gambler has the resources to double-up in the face of a losing
streak. The St Petersburg lottery has many similarities with the game played between the
state and the banks over the past century or so. The banks have repeatedly doubled-up. And
the state has underwritten any losing streak. Clearer practical examples of a policy timeconsistency problem are unlikely to exist.
4.

Resolving the time-inconsistency problem

In addressing this time-consistency problem, two broad approaches are possible: redesign of
the financial system to reduce the scale of insurable risks; and redesign of the social safety
net to make it less susceptible to gaming.
(a)

Redesigning the financial system

What options best tackle excessive risk-taking incentives? A number suggest themselves,
some modest, others more radical.
•

Introducing leverage limits: One simple means of altering the rules of the
asymmetric game between banks and the state is to place heavier restrictions on
leverage. European banks were not subject to a regulatory leverage ratio in the runup to crisis. They exploited that loophole. Closing it would bring about a clockwise
rotation in banks’ payoff schedule, lowering the beta of banks’ equity returns and
reducing risk-taking incentives.
This is an easy win. Simple leverage ratios already operate in countries such as the
US and Canada. They appear to have helped slow debt-fuelled balance sheet
inflation. The Basel Committee is now seeking to introduce leverage ratios
internationally. To be effective, it is important that leverage rules bite. They need to
be robust to the seductive, but ultimately siren, voices claiming this time is different.
That suggests they should operate as a regulatory rule (Pillar I), rather than being
left to supervisory discretion (Pillar II).
It is important, too, that leverage limits are set at the right level. Such limits need to
be fundamentally re-evaluated. We have sleepwalked into a world in which leverage
of 20 or 30 times capital is the rule rather than the exception. Now is a good time to
wake up. Evidence from the not-too-distant past suggests there may be less to fear

BIS Review 139/2009

7

from materially higher capital ratios – say, a multiple of current ratios – than some
would suggest (Chart 2).
•

Recalibrating risk weights: With hindsight, the capital assigned to certain categories
of high-risk and off balance sheet transactions by Basel rules was far too low. Those
mis-calibrations were then arbitraged by the banks in ways which included inflated
trading books and an over-expansion into high-risk loans and securitised assets.
The Basel Committee has already set about trying to correct some of the more
obvious of these defects. For example, materially higher risk weights are set to be
introduced for trading book assets from the end of 2010. This will include,
importantly, securitised and re-securitised products, whose payoffs profiles too
closely resembled deep out-of-the-money options (Figure 3). New risk weights
should better reflect the tail risk these products embody.
These reforms will close a regulatory loophole and thereby lower the beta of, and
hence systematic risk in, the banking system. They leave open some rather more
fundamental questions, which the Basel Committee are also considering. These
include whether the distinction between banking and trading books, and the resecuritisation of assets, are necessary in the first place. If a robust financial and
regulatory system is one which is parsimonious and transparent, the answer might
be that they are not. It may be time to take Occam’s razor to regulatory rulebooks.

•

Rethinking capital structure: Asymmetry of payoffs risks excessive risk-taking. The
source of this asymmetry is limited liability. It is revealing that limited liability was first
introduced into banking in the UK in the mid-19th century. That was roughly the time
state support for banks took shape. This is unlikely to have been serendipity. So
could the distortions from limited liability be tackled at source?
In the early days of banking, liability was not just unlimited; it was often as much
personal as financial. In 1360, a Barcelona banker was executed in front of his failed
bank, presumably as a way of discouraging generations of future bankers from
excessive risk-taking. 16 It has not been conspicuously successful. From the Middle
Ages, debtor prisons replaced the gallows. They were a common feature of many
developed countries, including the US and UK, right up until the 19th century.
The switch to limited liability at that time was a conscious attempt to encourage risk
capital into the banking system to help finance growth. In essence, this meant
trading off financial risk against future productivity. At first, equity in banks often
carried “double liability”, with shareholders liable for losses on the purchase price of
their shares plus their par value at issuance. Among state banks in the US during
the 19th and early 20th centuries, double liability is believed to have helped
constrain risk-taking. 17
This practice was ended at the time of the Great Depression in the US. Given the
likely need to rebuild bank equity in the future, now may not be the time to return to
unlimited liability. Fortunately, there are two alternative approaches to adapting
capital structure which alter the balance of risk-taking incentives, without
jeopardising the flow of risk capital. Both involve operating not on equity, but on
debt. And both involve making debt, like equity, a more loss-absorbing instrument in
stress events.
First, contingent capital is a means of automatically converting debt instruments into
equity in the event of a capital top-up being needed. The capital structure of banks

16

Caprio and Honohan (2008).

17

Grossman (2001).

8

BIS Review 139/2009

thereby becomes more malleable. There has been recent interest in contingent
capital instruments as a means of providing banks with an extra degree of freedom
in stress situations. 18 The benefits in principle seem clear. The difficulties in practice
include whether there is likely to be sufficient investor demand for such hybrid
instruments.
Second, wholesale debt instruments at present rank equally with retail deposits in
the UK in the event of a wind-up. In the US, depositor preference has operated
nationally since 1993, with retail deposits ranking ahead of wholesale debt. There
are benefits to depositor preference both ex-ante (by heightening debtor incentives
to monitor risk) and ex-post (by facilitating resolution). There are also some potential
downsides, including causing unsecured creditors to run sooner. It may be a good
time to reweigh these arguments in the UK.
•

Reconsidering the industrial organisation of banking: Over the past few decades, the
global banking system has evolved into a particular organisational form, with a small
number of large banks, a high degree of concentration and relatively low rates of
entry and exit. Events of the past two years have accelerated these trends. In 1998,
the five largest global banks had around 8% of global banking assets. By 2008, this
fraction had doubled to around 16% (Chart 10).
These structural trends worsen the time-consistency problem for the authorities,
increasing the pressure for state support to banks “too important to fail”. This has
heightened recent interest in rethinking the industrial organisation of finance. 19
There are a number of potential forms such a restructuring could take. 20 In weighing
these options, there may be lessons from an, on the face of it, unlikely corner of
finance: hedge funds.
Hedge funds started this crisis in the doghouse. Yet they are the dog that has not
barked. Their industrial structure may explain why. Unlike banking, the hedge fund
sector does not comprise a small number of large players, but rather a large number
of relatively small players. The largest hedge funds typically have assets under
management of less than $40bn, the largest banks assets in excess of $3 trillion.
Unlike banking, concentration in the hedge fund sector is low and has been falling.
The top 5 hedge funds comprise around 8% of total assets, down from 30% a
decade ago (Chart 10). Unlike banking, the business models of hedge funds are
typically specialised rather than diversified. And unlike banking, entry and exit rates
from the hedge fund industry are both high. The annual average attrition rate for
hedge funds is around 5%. At present, it is around double that. Among US banks,
the average attrition rate over the past few decades has been less than 0.1%; it has
not come close to hitting 5% at any point since the Great Depression.
It may be coincidence that the structure of the hedge fund sector emerged in the
absence of state regulation and state support. It may be coincidence that the
majority of hedge funds operate as partnerships with unlimited liability. It may be
coincidence that, despite their moniker of “highly-leveraged institutions”, most hedge
funds today operate with leverage less than a tenth that of the largest global banks.
Or perhaps it might be that the structure of this sector delivered greater systemic
robustness than could be achieved through prudential regulation. If so, that is an
important lesson for other parts of the financial system.

18

King (2009), Dudley (2009).

19

King (2009).

20

For example, Kay (2009), G30 (2009).

BIS Review 139/2009

9

(b)

Redesigning the safety net

•

A framework for the banking safety net: Even with systemic risk reduced, the state is
unlikely to be able credibly to stand aside when future tail risks eventuate, as they
are sure to do. Some bulwark is needed. As in other public policy arena, a predefined and transparent regime can help reinforce the credibility of ex-post actions,
serving as a pre-commitment device.
At present, only some of the ingredients of such an ex-ante framework exist.
Internationally, deposit insurance frameworks tend to be fairly well-defined; liquidity
insurance frameworks somewhat less so. Both are much better defined than
frameworks for capital insurance. A well-articulated framework for the banking safety
net would not only provide greater clarity on each of these pieces. It would also set
out interactions and interdependencies between them – when and how the different
insurance strands come together to avert crisis. At present, no such ex-ante map
exists. Having one in future would not guarantee, but could only increase, the
chances of it being adhered to.

•

Time-consistent liquidity insurance: Almost all central banks have flexed their
liquidity frameworks during the course of this crisis. And rightly so. In many cases,
this has meant a combination of longer-maturity lending to a broader range of
financial institutions against a wider set of collateral. Pre-crisis liquidity insurance
frameworks were shown during crisis to lack time-consistency. How can we best
guard against a recurrence?
Two elements are key. First, a greater degree of self-insurance by banks to lower
the probability of central bank resources needing to be drawn. In practice, this
means that liquidity regulation needs to be tightened, reversing the secular fall in
liquidity ratios (Chart 3). In the language of insurance, the excess on the central
bank policy needs to be raised materially. The FSA’s proposed new liquidity
regulation provides a good starting point. 21
Second, central bank liquidity insurance frameworks need explicitly to recognise the
possibility of drastic times requiring drastic measures. The key is to prevent such
drastic action becoming disorderly on the one hand, and permanent on the other.
The first can be achieved by having a pre-defined framework which recognises the
need for abnormal liquidity provision, whether in size, collateral quality or term. The
second can be achieved by setting prices (fees and collateral haircuts) for liquidity
provision which discourage abnormalities from becoming regularities. The Bank of
England’s new sterling monetary framework, announced last October, seeks to
apply those principles in practice. 22

•

Time-consistent deposit insurance: Deposit insurance schemes have been stretched
in many countries, to the point of offering blanket coverage of retail deposits. Those
actions are already damping the risk senses of depositors, who have rationally
reacted by seeking out the highest-yielding accounts. This has contributed to a
competitive frenzy in the retail deposit market. In the UK, retail deposit rates have
risen over the past year from 100 basis points below base rate to 100 basis points
above.
In general insurance markets, distorted risk choices are guarded against by sharing
the risk between insurer and insuree, ex-ante (through risk-based premia) or ex-post
(through co-insurance devices). Deposit insurance regimes in some, but not all,

21

FSA (2009).

22

Bank of England (2008).

10

BIS Review 139/2009

countries have such features. In the UK, deposit insurance premia are not riskbased. Private risk incentives would be better aligned with the public good if the
UK’s deposit insurance regime had such a feature.
•

Time-consistent capital insurance: In historical terms, capital insurance to the
banking system is the newest of the state support mechanisms for banks. Partly for
that reason, its framework is least well advanced. Indeed, give or take, there is no
framework at present.

Whether one is needed will depend importantly on the levels of private capital held in future
by the banking system – the degree of self-insurance. That debate has some distance still to
travel. But there are complementary measures which could serve a similar purpose. For
example, some academics have proposed private sector capital insurance schemes, funded
ex-ante by levies on banks. 23 So too have some policymakers. 24 These schemes are similar
in many respects with existing deposit insurance regimes. Like them, such schemes would
ideally set risk-based premia and be pre-funded to ensure they were time-consistent.
One potential benefit of private sector contingent capital proposals are that they allow a
mutualisation of risk. This lowers the aggregate pool of capital that might be needed by the
banking system. If this pool of capital is large enough to accommodate future crisis needs,
private sector capital insurance may offer a better cost/risk trade-off than self-insurance. As
history shows, however, this is a not inconsiderable “if”. Further work would be needed to
establish what size insurance scheme would genuinely augment the capital pool.
5.

Conclusion

Over the course of the past 800 years, the terms of trade between the state and the banks
have first swung decisively one way and then the other. For the majority of this period, the
state was reliant on the deep pockets of the banks to finance periodic fiscal crises. But for at
least the past century the pendulum has swung back, with the state often needing to dig
deep to keep crisis-prone banks afloat.
Events of the past two years have tested even the deep pockets of many states. In so doing,
they have added momentum to the century-long pendulum swing. Reversing direction will not
be easy. It is likely to require a financial sector reform effort every bit as radical as followed
the Great Depression. It is an open question whether reform efforts to date, while slowing the
swing, can bring about that change of direction.
References
Bagehot, W (1873), Lombard Street, a Description of the Money Market, Henry S. King and
Co. Publishers.
Bank of England (2008), The Development of the Bank of England’s Market Operations: a
Consultative
Paper
by
the
Bank
of
England,
available
at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/money/publications/condococt08.pdf.
Barro, R. J. (1979), “On the Determination of the Public Debt”, Journal of Political Economy
Vol 87(5), University of Chicago Press.
Beale, N., Rand, D., Arinaminpathy, N. and May, R. M (2009), Conflicts between Individual
and Systemic Risk in Banking and other Systems, forthcoming.

23

Kashyap and Stein (2008), NYU Stern School of Business (2008).

24

Tucker (2009).

BIS Review 139/2009

11

Berger, A., Herring, R., and Szegö, G. (1995), The Role of Capital in Financial Institutions,
Journal of Banking and Finance 19.
Capie, F., and Billings, M. (2004), Evidence on competition in English commercial banking,
1920-1970, Financial History Review, Vol.11.
Caprio, G. Jr. and Honohan, P. (2008), “Banking Crises”, CDE Working Paper Series.
Committee on the Global Financial System (2008), “Central Bank Operations in Response
to the Financial Turmoil”, CGFS Papers No. 31.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., Kane, E., and Laeven, L (2008), Deposit Insurance around the World:
Issues of Design and Implementation, MIT Press.
Dudley, W. C (2009), “Some Lessons from the Crisis”, Remarks at the Institute of
International Bankers Membership Luncheon, New York City.
FSA (2009), “Strengthening Liquidity Standards – Including Feedback on CP08/22, CP09/13,
CP09/14”,
Policy
Statement
09/16,
available
at
http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/policy/ps09_16.pdf
Grossman R. S (2001), “Double Liability and Bank Risk Taking”, Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking Vol. 33 No. 2.
Group of Thirty (2009), Financial Reform: A Framework for Financial Stability, available at
http://www.group30.org/pubs/pub_1460.htm
Haldane, A. G (2009), Rethinking the Financial Network,
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf

available

at

Homer, S. and Sylla, R (2005), A History of Interest Rates: Fourth Edition, John Wiley &
Sons.
Kashyap, A. K., Raghuram, R. G. and Stein, J. C (2008), “Rethinking Capital Regulation”,
Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Kay, J (2009), Narrow Banking: The Reform of Banking Regulation.
Keynes, J. M (1931), “The Consequences to the Banks of the Collapse of Money Values”,
Essays in Persuasion, Macmillan Publishers.
King, M (2009), Speech to Scottish business organisations, Edinburgh, available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech406.pdf
Laeven, L. and Valencia, F. V (2009), “Systemic Banking Crises: A New Database”, IMF
Working Paper No. 08/224.
Logan, A (2000), “The Early 1990s Small Banks’ Crisis: Leading Indicators”, Bank of
England Financial Stability Review Issue 09.
NYU Stern School of Business (2008), Repairing the US Financial Architecture: An
Independent View.
Rajan, R (1998), “The Past and Future of Commercial Banking Viewed through an
Incomplete Contract Lens”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Vol 30(3).
Reinhart, C. M and Rogoff, K (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial
Folly, Princeton University Press.
Sheppard, D. K (1971), The Growth and Role of U.K. Financial Institutions 1880-1962,
Methuen.
Thornton, H (1802), An Inquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great
Britain, J. Hatchard.

12

BIS Review 139/2009

Tucker, P (2009), “Regimes for Handling Bank Failures: Redrawing the Banking Social
Contract”, available at
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech396.pdf.
ANNEX

Table 1: Support packages
($ Trillions)

UK

US

Euro

- “Money creation”

0.32

3.76

0.98

- Collateral swaps

0.30

0.20

0.00

- Guarantees

0.64

2.08

>1.68

- Insurance

0.33

3.74

0.00

- Capital

0.12

0.70

0.31

Total (% GDP)

74%

73%

18%

Central Bank

Government

Source: Bank of England Financial Stability Report, June 2009. Figures for UK updated to November 4th 2009.
Notes: (1) Exchange rates used: FSR Euro / US dollar exchange rate of 0.710. Sterling / US dollar exchange rate of 0.613.
(2) Money creation includes both monetary and financial stability operations.

Table 2: Capital provision in past UK crises
Date

Crisis

1977

Secondary Slater
Banks
Walker

1984

1994

2008

Support
Reason for
recipient(s) capital
provision

Johnson
Matthey

Johnson
Matthey

Small
banks

National
Mortgage
Bank
RBS, LBG,
Northern
Rock

Current
crisis

Orderly
resolution (wind
down)
Orderly
resolution (wind
down)
Orderly
resolution (wind
down)
Mitigate
systemic risk
and promote
lending

Did UK
clearing
banks
receive
direct
capital
support?

Authority
providing
capital
support

% of
GDP
at the
time

Bank of
England

<0.1

Bank of
England

<0.1

Bank of
England

<0.1

Treasury

~4

Source: Bank of England

BIS Review 139/2009

13

Chart 1: UK banking sector assets as % of GDP
600

500

Percentage (%)

400

300

200

100

2006

2000

1994

1988

1982

1976

1970

1964

1958

1952

1946

1940

1934

1928

1922

1916

1910

1904

1898

1892

1886

1880

0

Year

Source: Sheppard, D. K (1971) and Bank of England.
Note: The definition of UK banking sector assets used in the series is broader after 1966, but using a narrower
definition throughout gives the same growth profile.

Chart 2: Capital ratios for UK and US banks

30

United States

25

Percentage (%)

20

15

United
Kingdom

10

5

2000

1990

1980

1970

1960

1950

1940

1930

1920

1910

1900

1890

1880

0

Year

Source: US: Berger, A, Herring, R and Szegö, G (1995). UK: Sheppard, D.K (1971), BBA, published accounts
and Bank of England calculations.

14

BIS Review 139/2009

Chart 3: Sterling liquid assets relative to total assets

Percentage of
total assets
(all currencies)

Broad ratio(a)
Reserve ratio(b)
Narrow ratio(c)

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

68

73

78

83

88

93

98

03

08

Sources: Bank of England and Bank calculations.
(a) Cash + Bank of England balances + money at call + eligible bills + UK gilts.
(b) Proxied by: Bank of England balances + money at call + eligable bills.
(c) Cash + Bank of England balances + eligible bills.

Chart 4: Return on equity for UK banks
35.0
30.0

μ = 20.4
σ = 6.9

Percen tag e

25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0

μ = 7.0
σ = 2.0

5.0
0.0
1921 1926 1931 1936 1941 1946 1951 1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996 2001 2006
Year
Source: Capie, F. and Billings, M (2004), BBA and Bank of England calculations.
Note: There is a definitional change in the sample in 1967. The latter period has a slightly larger sample of banks
and returns on equity are calculated somewhat differently, including being pre-tax.

BIS Review 139/2009

15

Chart 5: Bank of England’s balance sheet as % of GDP
20

(a)

(c)

(b)

(f)

(e)

(d)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(k)

(j)

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

(a) Famine / End of railroad boom (1847)
(b) Overextension of credit from 1855-1866
(c) Failure of Overend Gurney (1866)
(d) Failure of City of Glasgow Bank (1878)

(e) Support for Barings (1890)
(f) W W I (1914)
(g) Currency and Bank Note Act (1928)
(h) W orld W ar II (1941)

2004

1998

1992

1986

1980

1974

1968

1962

1956

1950

1944

1938

1932

1926

1920

1914

1908

1902

1896

1890

1884

1878

1872

1866

1860

1854

1848

1842

1836

1830

0

(i) Secondary Banking Crisis (1973)
(j) Small Banks Crisis (1991)
(k) Current Crisis (2007)

Source: Bank of England.

Chart 6: Number of deposit insurance schemes and crises
100
90

Number of adopters

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

1934 – Great Depression (US)
1977 – Banking crisis (Spain)
1982 – Banking crisis (Kuwait)
1985 – Banking crisis (Kenya)
1994 – Banking crises (Czech Republic, Uganda)

2008

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

1956

1952

1948

1944

1940

1936

1932

0

1995 – Banking crises (Brazil, Bulgaria)
1996 – Banking crises (Belarus, Lithuania)
1996-1998 – Asian crisis (Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Thailand)
1998 – Banking crisis (Ukraine)
1999 – Banking crises (Ecuador, El Salvador)

Source: Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Kane, E., and Laeven, L (2008); Laeven, L. and Valencia, F (2008).

16

BIS Review 139/2009

Chart 7: Leverage and risk-taking in UK banks
Total Asse ts/Tier 1 Capital
80

2005-2008

70

2001-2004
1997-2000

60
50
40
30
T ier 1 ratio of 4%

20
10

T ier 1 ratio of 8%

0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Risk We ighte d Asse ts/Total Assets
Source: Published accounts and Bank calculations.

Chart 8: LCFIs’ trading portfolios and financial leverage – 2007

Line of best fit

80
70
Total assets/Tier 1 Capital

UBS
60

Deutsche

SocGen
Barclays
BNP

50
40

RBS

30

Citi
BofA

20

Credit
Suisse
HSBC
JPM

10
0
0.0

0.1

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
T rading assets/total assets

0.7

0.8

Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations

BIS Review 139/2009

17

Chart 9: Leverage and risk-taking in international banks – 2007
Total Adjuste d Asse ts/Tier 1 Capital
80

4% T 1 capital ratio

70
60

UBS

50
Credit
Suisse

40
30

Deutsche
SocGen
RBS
BNP
Citi
Barclays

BoA

20
HSBC JPM

10
0

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Risk We ighted Assets/Total Adjuste d Asse ts
Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations.
Notes: These adjustments aim to ensure a common accounting treatment of exposures between US and
European banks.

Chart 10: Bank and hedge fund concentration

35

T op 5 as % of
sample assets

T op 5 assets %
of top 1000

30

18
16

Global banks (RHS)

14
25
12
20

10
8

15
Hedge funds (LHS)

6

10
4
5

2
2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

0
1998

0

Source: TASS and The Banker

18

BIS Review 139/2009

Figure 1: Payoff profile for bank equity

β=1

Return on Bank Equity

Return on Market Portfolio

Socialised losses

Figure 2: Payoff profiles for bank equity

β=2
Return on Bank Equity
β=1

Return on Market Portfolio

Leverage-induced social losses

BIS Review 139/2009

19

Figure 3: Payoff profile for bank equity

Return on Bank Equity

β=1

Return on Market Portfolio

Risky-bet induced social losses

20

BIS Review 139/2009

Paul Tucker: The crisis management menu
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England,
at the SUERF, CEPS and Belgian Financial Forum Conference: “Crisis Management at the
Cross-Roads”, Brussels, 16 November 2009.
*

*

*

It is a great pleasure to be here today. The current crisis has thrown up so many lessons in
so many dimensions of the “rules of the game” for the financial system, that I congratulate
the organisers on devoting a whole conference to crisis management. That in itself is a
meaty enterprise. But a vital one.
By way of setting the scene for today’s conference, I will offer the Bank of England’s
perspective on the various components of a crisis management package: central bank
liquidity insurance for viable firms and markets; firm recovery plans, and contingent capital;
resolution plans for winding down failed businesses, including payouts from depositinsurance regimes; and official-sector support operations, including emergency liquidity
assistance and Capital of Last Resort. Every country’s authorities need a policy on each of
these components, because some day in the future our successors will find that, however
good, the improvements our generation makes in the structure, regulation and supervision of
the financial system will let them down.
A thread that runs through the discussion is how to preserve the core financial services
provided to the economy through periods of extreme stress without bailing out banks’ equity
holders or uninsured wholesale creditors. That is the essence of the “Too Big/Important To
Fail” debate. It is not so much that the top management of banks consciously swing for the
fences, but rather that wholesale credit may be systematically too cheap for banks, and
perhaps other intermediaries too, unless the usual market disciplines of failure can apply.
The international community is, rightly, increasingly focused on this. And, in particular, it is
good news that the G20 Finance Ministers and Governors have asked the Financial Stability
Board to pursue it. To quote the theme of this conference, “TBTF” is probably the definitive
Cross-Roads issue.
Central bank liquidity insurance: discount window lending against wide collateral
I shall begin with the central banker’s role as lender of last resort, the one area where there
was quite a lot of thinking ahead of this current crisis.
Even so, one of the things many central banks, including the Bank of England, confronted
over the past two years or so was that, when conditions are bad enough, the central bank will
inevitably lend to solvent and viable firms against a very wide range of collateral. Since we
will end up doing so, it is wise to acknowledge that in advance. But, crucially, it is also wise to
set the terms so as to avoid subsidising or encouraging imprudent liquidity management by
firms in normal circumstances. That is one of the principles which underpin the Bank of
England’s own new, permanent liquidity facilities introduced just over a year ago. The other
principles are that:
•

Our liquidity insurance should absolutely not cut across monetary policy.

•

In lending against a wide class of collateral, the central bank must apply appropriate
haircuts, and must be capable of valuing the assets and of managing them in the
event of a counterparty default. Our haircuts are published and include various addons for particular risks. And the underlying assets accepted as collateral should
have a viable underlying market.

BIS Review 144/2009

1

•

As a means of effecting the delivery of insurance, secured loans (repo or collateral
swaps) are preferable in most circumstances to outright purchases, as during the life
of a loan central banks can update the value of the security, the collateral margins
and other terms that control the risk to them.

•

Such lending against wider collateral should routinely be for sufficiently long
maturities to help forestall panic by avoiding rollover risk for the firms without
exposing central banks to risk by tying them in for unduly long periods.

•

Permanent facilities providing bilateral liquidity insurance should routinely be made
available only to commercial banks (and other authorised deposit takers). They
unavoidably need such insurance because their deposit liabilities are money, giving
them a vital role, as monetary institutions, in the economy and financial system.

•

But such public facilities should not be available to banks where in the judgment of
the central bank there are serious question-marks over their viability or solvency.
(As I shall discuss later, that need not exhaust our menu for providing liquidity to
individual firms in support operations. 1 )

But the most vital principle is to avoid creating perverse incentives for banks to take
excessive liquidity risk. There are two elements to this. One is the importance of the
regulatory regime: making banks hold a minimum stock of truly high-quality liquidity.
Internationally, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and, in the EU, the Committee
of European Banking Supervisors are working on that. In the UK, the FSA is committed to
defining core liquidity as just that: inalienably liquid. Defining core liquidity in terms of assets
that are eligible for rediscount at the central bank, as some have argued, is in our view a
dangerous course to take. It could have the unhelpful effect of making central banks lenders
of first rather than of last resort.
The second element in avoiding perverse incentives is the terms on which liquidity insurance
is available from the central bank. Setting the right pricing is not easy. Two approaches
could, in principle, be adopted. One would be to charge an ex ante fee, say annually, for
access to the liquidity facilities, perhaps based on how much liquidity risk individual banks
had been taking. So far as I know, no central bank has done that yet, but it should not be
ruled out as an idea. The other approach is, of course, to charge a premium interest rate
upon the facilities being drawn on. The Bank of England has adopted a schedule for our
Discount Window Facility under which the rate charged increases with the size of a drawing
relative to the bank’s size, and also with the illiquidity and riskiness of the collateral provided.
We want to underline that banks will end up paying more to draw on the insurance line if they
are overly reliant on illiquid, risky collateral – implying that their balance sheet was overly
exposed to liquidity risk. These considerations have to be taken into account if central banks
are to lend against very broad asset classes; for example, as we flagged earlier in the year,
the Bank of England will be deciding over the coming months whether to extend the collateral
eligible in our Discount Window to portfolios of loans to companies and households and of
equities. The Bank of England also charges a premium rate if a bank borrows from us
against assets comprising securitisations of loans they originated themselves. This is
because there needs to be an incentive to make such securities marketable; and, more
important, it can help to protect us against one of the most basic risks in banking – the
correlation between the quality of a bank’s underwriting standards and its solvency.
Although central banks need to be ready to lend against a wide range of collateral, we do still
need to be careful about precisely what we take. To that end, my colleagues Paul Fisher and
Sarah Breeden will be developing criteria for the structure and disclosures around the

1

2

In the UK, support operations can be effected under the Tripartite Memorandum of Understanding between
the UK’s Tripartite authorities (HMT, FSA and Bank).

BIS Review 144/2009

securitisations that will be acceptable to us in steady state. The ECB is conducting a similar
exercise. Since that may have some read across to the development of the market itself, I
hope we can count on active industry collaboration as we undertake that work.
Before moving on, I should pause for a moment on the Bank’s principle that our routinely
available liquidity insurance facilities should be available only to commercial banks. Now, we
do of course realise that, especially in the US, a number of other kinds of financial firm or
vehicle have been given access to special liquidity assistance during this crisis: finance
companies, money funds, securities dealers. But in terms of the reform agenda, to our mind
this underlines the importance of ensuring that a shadow banking system, running big
maturity mismatches but offering capital certainty and instant liquidity to savers, does not
grow just beyond the perimeter of bank regulation. This is not an issue just in the US. It was,
after all, the suspension of redemptions by European enhanced-return money funds that
triggered the money market crisis in August 2007. This part of the reform agenda – the
restructuring of the continuing shadow banking system – must not be neglected.
Market maker of last resort?
The purpose of providing liquidity insurance to banks is well known – having been developed
since Bagehot’s day and before. It serves us well to put a finger in the dyke, with a view to
preventing a liquidity panic developing unnecessarily into a solvency problem through the
forced-sale of assets.
But this crisis has reminded everyone that it is not only firms that can suffer liquidity runs.
Markets can too.
Liquidity insurance facilities that underpin banks' funding are obviously helpful to preserving
market liquidity, as they increase the probability of bank-dealers being able to finance
unwanted inventory.
But arguments have been advanced during the crisis that the authorities should be able to
act more directly to preserve market liquidity, especially if bank-dealers withdraw from
market-making because they become capital constrained. That is, essentially, the origin of
suggestion that central banks should stand ready to act as Market Makers of Last Resort. 2
As the amount of credit that gets intermediated via markets rather than via institutions grows,
the need for a MMLR grows too.
This is by no means straightforward, and not only because it is not central to our inheritance.
Whereas lending to a bank does with certainty give that bank more liquidity, entering a
market as a buyer does not automatically enhance the liquidity of that market in a
sustainable way. Also, whereas central banks protect themselves against risk in secured
loans by requiring more collateral if conditions deteriorate, an outright purchase is a one-off
transaction; there’s no going back to renegotiate the price afterwards.
By analogy with the more familiar “LOLR” function, the following thoughts suggest
themselves for debate in our community.
•

As with LOLR, central banks should only engage in MMLR operations that do not
interfere with monetary policy.

•

A MMLR should aim to buy at a discount to the fundamental value of a risky asset,
with the implicit bid-ask spreads unattractive relative to peacetime conditions in
private markets but impliedly better than those available during the crisis itself. The

2

For example see, Buiter W and Sibert A (2007), “The Central Bank as Market Maker of Last Resort”,
Maverecon – Willem Buiter’s Blog (http://maverecon.blogspot.com/2007/08/central-bank-as-market-maker-oflast.html).

BIS Review 144/2009

3

purchase mechanism should be designed to reveal information about the state of
the market and the fairness of prices paid.
•

While the risk inherent in outright purchases cannot be avoided, the MMLR
absolutely must stay within the capacity determined by its capital resources.

•

And crucially, the MMLR should aim to be catalytic, helping ideally to kick-start a
market rather than replace it. And it should avoid propping up markets that would
not be fundamentally viable once the liquidity crisis subsided. The underlying
objective is, as elsewhere, to help to maintain continuity of the crucial services that
the financial system provides to the economy.

In big picture terms, the Bank of England’s programme of auctions to purchase small
amounts of a fairly wide range of sterling corporate bonds can be viewed as one
manifestation of that broad approach to MMLR. The aim has been to aid improvements in the
liquidity of the market, including by reducing the inventory risk to “market makers”.
But our community is some distance from thinking through the extent to which this kind of
thing should feature as a permanent part of our armoury. While not an urgent issue, it is an
important one given the increasing role of capital markets in our financial system.
Recovery plans, and contingent capital
Whether provided to individual firms or to markets, routine liquidity insurance will not always
suffice. Sometimes a liquidity problem is triggered by fundamental problems. Sometimes a
liquidity crisis creates credit problems through the effects of a fire sale of assets. Firms must
plan for distress. Not only is that in the interests of the financial system and, indeed, of the
economy more widely, it is in the interests of firms themselves. At not a few distressed firms
around the world, at times over the past three years the leadership “lost it” under the
pressure of events. Contingency planning is essential. Regulators must make firms do it –
properly. And that means for really disagreeable scenarios.
As the UK’s FSA has recently explained, 3 the clear recommendation of the G20-sponsored
Financial Stability Board is that these contingency plans need two, distinct components. A
recovery plan for maintaining a going concern. And a resolution plan for firms that, however
regrettably, need to be laid to rest. The objective in each case is to maintain the financial
system’s provision of essential services to the economy.
Firms themselves need to play a leading role in drawing up “recovery plans”. At least two
components are needed, roughly corresponding to liquidity and capital. First, a contingency
funding plan (CFP). Too few banks of any size seem to have had one in any serious way.
There was, for example, too little focus on the effects of ratings downgrades on collateral
calls and on the availability of lines of credit. And too little attention was paid to core liquidity
holdings: a treasury portfolio comprising the FRNs issued by other banks does not leave a
distressed bank with many options in the face of system-wide stress. Banks need to know
exactly what assets they hold in which securities-depository systems; how long it would take
to deploy them; and which are eligible in which central banks’ routine facilities. Too few
banks had that information readily to hand. Maybe they do now. They should.
The FSA has very kindly agreed to share with the Bank of England the CFPs of banks (and
building societies) where relevant to our functions. As well as helping us to discharge our
financial stability responsibilities more broadly, this will be useful in making sense of requests
to draw from our Discount Window Facility.

3

4

FSA DP09/4: Turner Review Conference Discussion Paper, “A regulatory response to the global banking
crisis: systemically important banks and assessing the cumulative impact”.

BIS Review 144/2009

Second and beyond liquidity planning, recovery can involve derisking. This might mean
laying off risk, shedding positions or even selling businesses. Once in distress, banks
absolutely must be prepared to shrink their franchise in order to sustain themselves. That
may entail having businesses set up within groups in a way that would facilitate sale, if
necessary. Sometimes what a group regards as its core franchise will not map exactly into
what the authorities think of as the essential economic services it provides. That is obviously
for discussion between firms and their regulators, who need to be ready to exercise powers
to force risk-reduction and recapitalisation where necessary to preserve the soundness of the
enterprise and the stability of the system.
“Derisking” is all about the capital resources of banks in the face of idiosyncratic or
widespread stress. There is, therefore, a read across from the “Living Wills” exercise to the
question of how much capital banks should hold. Almost no amount of capital is enough if
things are bad enough. Which is why contingent capital might potentially be an important
element in banks’ recovery plans, as the Governor set out recently in Edinburgh. 4
This would not be the kind of hybrid capital that mushroomed in the decade or so leading up
to the crisis. The familiar types of subordinated debt can absorb losses only if a bank is put
into liquidation, and so really has no place in regulatory capital requirements as we cannot
rely on liquidation as the only resolution tool. It has been a faultline in the design of the
financial system as a whole that banks issued securities that counted as capital for regulatory
purposes, and on which they could therefore leverage up, but with institutional investors
treating them as very low risk investments backing household pension and annuity savings.
By contrast, contingent capital would be debt that converted into common, loss-absorbing
equity if a bank hit turbulence. It is, in effect, a form of catastrophe insurance provided by the
private sector.
Why should long-term savings institutions and asset managers be prepared to provide such
insurance? One possible reason is that if enough of them were to do so for enough banks, it
might well help to protect the value of their investment portfolios more generally. If ever it
needed to be demonstrated, the current crisis has surely put it beyond doubt – not only for
our generation but for the next one too – that serious distress in the banking system deepens
an economic downturn and so impairs pretty well all asset values. By taking a hit in one part
of their portfolio by providing equity protection to banks, institutions might well be able to
support the value of their investments more widely. And the trigger for conversion from debt
into equity could be at a margin of comfort away from true catastrophe; say, a percentage
point or so above the minimum regulatory capital ratio.
Of course, this would entail a structural shift over time in investment portfolios. But the
system might be able to manage that adjustment. After all, it managed the all together less
desirable adjustment to the development of the existing hybrid capital markets. But demand
for contingent capital is, inevitably, uncertain at this stage. As are the terms on which it will
be provided. We welcome the growing private sector focus on this.

4

King Mervyn A. (2009), “Speech by Mervyn King, Governor” to Scottish Business Organisations, Edinburgh,
October 2009. See also Tucker P M W (2009a), “Remarks by Paul Tucker”, Panel session at the Turner
Review Conference, London, March 2009 (pp. 5) and Tucker P M W (2009b), “The repertoire of official sector
interventions in the financial system: last resort lending, market-making, and capital”, Bank of Japan’s 2009
International Conference, Tokyo, May 2009 (pp. 19). In the academic community, the idea was aired in “An
Expedited Resolution Mechanism for Distressed Financial Firms: Regulatory Hybrid Securities”, Squam Lake
Working Group on Financial Regulation, April 2009, Council on Foreign Relations. Dudley, William C. (2009)
“Remarks by William Dudley” at the Institute of International Bankers Membership Luncheon, New York City,
October 2009.

BIS Review 144/2009

5

Resolution of bank failures
If recovery plans prove wanting, then distressed banks need to be “resolved” – laid to rest,
but without undermining crucial economic services. Sometimes the best course will be a
straightforward, whole-bank liquidation, with retail depositors receiving a payout from the
insurance fund. But, alternatively, resolution can involve selling the deposit book – and so the
vital payments services – to another bank. Good assets might go with the deposits, or be
transferred elsewhere. Bad (or at least unsaleable) assets go into run off. Choosing the best
course is central to effective resolution planning.
To split up and transfer the different parts of a bank, the authorities obviously need specific
and extensive powers. The broad model is provided by the Deposit Insurance Corporations
of the USA and Canada. The UK has recently introduced such powers, having learnt the
hard way that we needed them. A number of other countries in the EU adapt their normal
corporate insolvency regime for the special structure of banks, but do not all have the option
to break up and transfer different parts of the business. This is the subject of the recent
consultation paper published by the European Commission. 5
In the UK, the Bank of England has become the Special Resolution Authority. We have been
helped by the hands-on operational expertise necessary for our market operations and for
running the wholesale payments system. This new responsibility has given us an interesting
vantage point on the preconditions for effective resolution. In the first place, let me tell you
that it is very information-intensive. It requires a lot of detail on how a bank’s business is
structured and run. And that information needs to be available at an early stage. Amongst
many things, it includes details of netting and derivative contracts, and I am struck that, in the
US, the FDIC now requires troubled banks to demonstrate that they could report each day
the relevant details of derivative portfolios. The Bank of England plans to consider whether or
not something like that might be warranted in the UK. More generally, the UK FSA has said
that the authorities will need to be assured that firms are able to provide the necessary data
to assess resolution options and to execute the authorities’ chosen strategy.
But it is not just the resolution authority which needs lots of information. Potential bidders for
all or parts of an ailing bank do too – of the kind typically offered to bidders in a “friendly”
M&A transaction. Banks probably need routinely to maintain such “Data Rooms” as part of
their contingency plans – something which the FSA is examining.
As will be abundantly clear from this brief review, the “recovery and resolution plan”
enterprise requires the regulators to work closely with the resolution authorities, and with
central banks as liquidity providers. In the UK, wearing our “resolution authority” hat, the
Bank hopes to be able to work closely with individual banks and the FSA in helping to specify
and guide what is needed in practice. My colleague Andrew Bailey will be discussing in more
detail tomorrow one of the issues raised by past cases.
The enterprise also entails thinking beyond the resolution of modest-sized domestic banks.
Both the US and UK authorities are exploring how to extend resolution regimes to bank
holding companies and to other types of firm that could prove systemically significant in
some circumstances. As present, no one thinks that Large and Complex Financial
Institutions could be resolved at all smoothly, as the rescues of the past twelve months show.
Cross-border resolutions and the international “living wills” exercise
There is, therefore, a substantial international dimension to this work, which is being
facilitated by the Financial Stability Board. Over the next few months, the top 25 or so banks

5

6

Communication from the European Commission, An EU Framework for Cross-Border Crisis Management in
the Banking Sector, 20 October 2009.
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/crisis_management/index_en.htm#overview

BIS Review 144/2009

and dealers in the world will be working with the authorities to produce recovery and
resolution plans. The effort will involve not only line supervisors but also resolution authorities
and central banks. Firms are expected to produce recovery plans. For obvious reasons,
resolution plans need to be produced by the authorities, while still drawing on inputs from the
firms. In the UK, the FSA has recently published how they will approach this international
effort. 6
It is a formidable task. Working with the FSB secretariat, my role, as chairman to the CrossBorder Crisis Management Working Group, will be to help colleagues to flush out the issues,
so that they can be properly debated and reviewed by G20 Ministers and Governors later
next year. With the European Commission on the FSB and also the resolution working group,
I hope that will also help to inform work at the European level.
There will quite probably be hard questions. They could include whether something needs to
be done about the complex structures and organisation of some banks. Another big issue
might be which services truly need to be maintained. Whether there are conflicts between the
insolvency laws and special resolution regimes of different countries that would materially
impede effective resolution for some groups. And another would be whether losses can in
the future credibly be made to fall on wholesale creditors. Maybe even about burden sharing
amongst national authorities if fiscal support proves unavoidable when an internationally
active bank fails. In all this the objective, of course, is to get to a place where taxpayers’
resources are not needed, implicitly or explicitly, to underpin the national and international
credit systems. And some of those operational questions, therefore, shade into the broader
debates about the structure and regulation of the financial system. 7
Of that list of issues, I should highlight two today.
The first is the entanglements and conflicts that can exist between home and host insolvency
and resolution laws. There is, for example, a first-order difference between, on the one hand,
countries whose regime effectively permits a de facto ring-fencing of locally domiciled assets
for local depositors and, on the other hand, those that treat liquidation as a joined-up, global
exercise, with all unencumbered assets shared pro rata across senior unsecured creditors.
These issues are not new. They were highlighted nearly twenty years ago by the closure of
BCCI’s operations around the world. 8 Subsequently, in Europe, insolvency law for banks was
improved through the Credit Institutions Reorganisation and Winding-Up Directive. There is a
single-entity insolvency regime for any bank incorporated in the EEA, applying to the parent
bank and also to all its branches throughout the EEA. We also have, in the Settlement
Finality Directive, a sound legal basis for the integrity of wholesale payments transfers in the
event of a default, without which the effects of failure could be truly devastating. And in the
Financial Collateral Directive, we have an assurance that national insolvency or
reorganisation measures cannot be applied to prevent or delay counterparties of a failed
institution from exercising their rights to close out, net and/or enforce their security interests

6

Financial Services Authority Turner Review Conference Discussion Paper, “A regulatory response to the
global banking crisis: systemically important banks and assessing the cumulative impact”, FSA DP 09/4.

7

King Mervyn A. (2009), “Speech by Mervyn King, Governor” to Scottish Business Organisations, Edinburgh,
October 2009.

8

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1992). “The insolvency liquidation of a multinational bank”, Bank for
International Settlements. Its key conclusions were: (1) when closing a multinational bank, supervisors should
pay attention to the nature and timing of communications among themselves and of their communications with
creditors, shareholders and management; (2) the nature of liquidation rules may be relevant to the manner in
which multinational banks are supervised; (3) differences in liquidation rules across jurisdictions in a windingup can affect returns to depositors and other creditors and the operations of deposit protection schemes; and
4) coordination and cooperation between liquidators can affect the returns to creditors in a liquidation and can
be affected by the role of supervisors in a liquidation.

BIS Review 144/2009

7

in order to realise financial collateral. But we do not yet have compatible bank resolution
regimes, and some existing Directives were designed without resolution in mind.
We now have another chance. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has published
an extensive review of impediments to the resolution of cross-border banks arising from
national insolvency laws, resolution regimes, or supervisory practices. And the European
Commission has recently launched a consultation asking what changes to the European
legislative framework are needed to address these issues. We need to focus on who should
take what concrete actions. I think the FSB will be picking up that issue.
Resolution and support operations: who should pick up the tab?
The second issue concerning resolution I want to say something about is the allocation of
losses to creditors and to the official sector from support operations. The formal position
varies between support for insured deposits and for other creditors.
Deposit insurance, and risk-based premia
Insured deposits are, of course, insured. It is often assumed that governments stand behind
such schemes. But governments do not have pick up the final tab. Such schemes are
ultimately paid for by the banks themselves. Whether schemes are funded or not,
governments have a legal right to make recoveries from the residual banking industry over
the succeeding years.
There is, still, a question of the basis of the levy. This arises most clearly in a system which
guarantees 100% repayment up to some meaningful amount (now £50,000 in the UK). While
it has many merits, complete cover affects the dynamics of the market place in a potentially
unhelpful way. It makes it easier for banks to pay up for deposits. The implied signal that a
bank offering a high return would be taking greater risk than others, as it would have to, does
not matter to the depositors. They are covered, and so are induced to place their money
wherever they can achieve the best returns.
That is a recipe for imprudent risk taking. One possible way of addressing it would be to
make such risk-taking banks pay a higher levy into the insurance scheme. The Bank of
England thinks that this deserves serious consideration, and it is now the subject of debate in
the UK.
Beyond deposit insurance: how can the industry bear the cost of rescues?
During the current crisis, around the world governments have gone much further than
protecting only insured depositors – uninsured wholesale creditors have been bailed out too.
The need for such support operations was evident if complete systemic collapse was to be
averted. But it does raise big questions looking ahead – of fairness and of incentives. Once
more, we need some principles for what are in effect official Capital of Last Resort (CofLR)
operations.
One possible starting point is how central banks have learned to think about bespoke
liquidity-support operations, so called Emergency Liquidity Assistance. After explicitly
recognising that occasionally liquidity support operations can end up providing de facto risk
capital if the recipient deteriorates, the late Eddie George offered some thoughts on this in
1993; 9 “central banks are not in the business of providing public subsidy to private

9

8

“The pursuit of financial stability”, LSE lecture by the late Eddie George, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,
1997; and Mervyn King’s September 2007 letter to the Treasury Select Committee, “Turmoil in financial
markets: what can central banks do?”

BIS Review 144/2009

shareholders. If we do provide support, we will try to structure it so that any losses fall first on
the shareholders and any benefits come first to us. And any support we provide will be on
terms that are as penal as we can make them, without
precipitating the collapse we are trying to avoid ……… We look for a clean exit. The
company may be required to run down or restructure its operations, under our surveillance,
to the point where it can do without our support. We aim to protect the system, not to keep in
being unviable banking capacity …...” And, paraphrasing Mervyn King in 2007: “if the
[authorities] underwrite any [risk] that threatens to damage the economy as a whole, it
encourages the view that as long as a bank takes the same sort of risks that other banks are
taking then it is more likely that their problems will be insured ex post.”
That provides a useful context for the debate about whether the cost of bailouts can
somehow be recovered from the industry. Compared with a year ago, a number of ideas are
now in circulation. One possibility is to establish a fund in advance. Another is to raise a levy
on the surviving banks.
An argument in favour of the former is that it would raise contributions from risky banks
before they fail. And it would allow the levies to be related to the size of their uninsured
creditors, as some in the US have suggested. 10 But I do just wonder whether it would be
realistic to raise, and over the decades sustain, a sufficiently large fund.
The alternative, as I have discussed before, 11 is to raise a levy from surviving firms after the
event. This would have to be linked to a systemic-crisis threshold being passed for the
deployment of public funds. And the basis for deciding how much was recovered from
individual firms would need to be both clear and principled. In particular, it would be
important to try to incorporate features that enabled costs of failures somehow to fall to
uninsured, wholesale creditors. Those who finance the system in the good times need to
have incentives to price for risk.
Summary
This has been a fairly high-level survey of the instruments on the crisis management menu.
They are, of course, interlinked. They also bear on the wider debates about the structure and
regulation of the financial system. Perhaps most obviously, the feasibility of producing
recovery and resolution plans will feed into international and domestic decisions on minimum
capital requirements for banks in general and on the mooted add-ons for so-called
systemically significant firms. The weaker a recovery plan and the greater the obstacles in
the way of its effective resolution, the more capital (and liquidity) a bank is going to have to
hold. This is why emerging interest in Contingent Capital instruments is so important. If
CoCos could form a material part of recovery plans, the landscape might just be transformed.
And that in turn goes to the big issue. Whether our community can find ways of distributing
the costs of official sector support operations back to the system and its uninsured creditors
rather than to the general taxpayer. If we can achieve that, market discipline would be
enhanced. We need to hang on to “market discipline” as a watchword in these debates. The
goal of re-regulation – of redrawing the rules of the game for the financial system – should
not be to reintroduce the wisdom of the state into micro decisions about how to run
businesses. But rather to put market discipline at the heart of a market economy. An effective

10

See the recent statement by Sheila C. Bair, Chairman, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to the
Financial Services Committee; US House of Representatives (29 October, 2009).

11

See Tucker P M W (2009b), “The repertoire of official sector interventions in the financial system: last resort
lending, market-making, and capital”, Bank of Japan’s 2009 International Conference, Tokyo, May 2009 (pp.
18).

BIS Review 144/2009

9

framework for crisis management drawing on the lessons of this crisis can take us in that
direction.

10

BIS Review 144/2009

Andrew Bailey: Recovery and resolution plans
Remarks by Mr Andrew Bailey, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief Cashier of
the Bank of England, at the Santander International Banking Conference, Madrid,
17 November 2009.
I am grateful to Victoria Cleland, Chris Daniels, Iain De Weymarn, Andrew Hauser, Andrew Hewitt, Tony Lomas,
Orla May, Maggie Mills, Sally Reid, Paul Tucker and Andrew Wardlow for their comments and advice.

*

*

*

It is a pleasure to be in Madrid today, not least because finding time to reflect on the future of
the banking system means that we are at some distance from the urgent fire-fighting that has
characterised the past two autumns. But I would not wish thereby to downplay the
importance and urgency of the rebuilding task. The past two autumns were in many ways
taken up with doing what had to be done in crisis conditions. And what had to be done
involved the use of public money on a scale that has been unprecedented and was
previously unimaginable. There was nothing easy about that task, and from the perspective
of resolving the problems of the system too often we have had to grit our teeth, accept that
“we are where we are” and get on with the job in hand. Fire-fighters don’t get to choose the
fires they fight, or even sometimes how they fight them.
But fire prevention is better than fire-fighting. We cannot justify having a banking system that
depends on the use of public money to douse the fire when the crisis comes. And we also
cannot allow conditions to exist where risks are taken on the basis that this backstop exists.
“Too big” or “Too important to fail” are shorthand for institutions that exist in their chosen form
as a result of underwriting with public money. I don’t believe that there is anything
controversial about a statement that no industry can take on a form which is a consequence
of such a massive potential, and of course recently actual, call on public money.
The big issue is therefore what to do to correct the situation. There are three elements to the
debate: regulation, structure and resolution. We can re-design and re-build the fire
prevention systems in the existing landscape. This is the regulation element. At the heart of
this is action on capital requirements, including a role for contingent capital and larger
liquidity buffers.
But we may also conclude that we want to prevent fires by having a different landscape of
buildings – a town planning solution in which the structure of the industry is re-drawn. And in
the past, cities were rebuilt with that objective in mind. This is the structure element.
But, whichever combination of these courses we choose to take, we cannot guarantee that
there will be no fires in the future, and we would be extremely foolish if we made that
promise. And, the odds are that the cause of the next one will not be the same. I have been
involved in mopping up problems in banks long enough to have been involved in Barings,
which was an idiosyncratic fraud, not a sector-wide problem. This is the resolution element.
In short, we need better fire prevention and better fire-fighting. In the UK we took a major
step earlier this year by creating a Special Resolution Regime. But that is not the end of the
response to the crisis. Rather, it is where “living wills” or what we now prefer to call Recovery
and Resolution Plans, or RRPs, come in. I want to spend the rest of my time setting out what
I think should be the role and form of these plans, and why they should be critical tools both
for banks themselves, banking supervisors and resolution authorities.
I have been struck by the strength of support for RRPs. In April, the G20 leaders endorsed a
set of principles from the Financial Stability Board that include strong encouragement for
firms to maintain contingency plans and procedures for use in a wind down, with regular
reviews to ensure that they remain accurate and adequate. The Financial Stability Board
cross-border Crisis Management Working Group, chaired by my colleague, Paul Tucker, has

BIS Review 156/2009

1

published principles aimed at strengthening the ability of authorities to deal with a crisis in
certain cross-border financial groups. In the UK, the FSA has recently issued a consultation
paper on RRPs, and an important initial pilot exercise will involve reviewing the contingency
plans and procedures of the major firms as they draw them up over the coming months. The
timetable for this work is ambitious with the plans being drawn up in the first quarter of next
year, but that is necessarily so. The FSA and the Bank of England, working together, will
review and challenge the submissions to assess their credibility.
RRPs need to be owned by financial institutions at Board level. They should be of such
importance that Boards need to understand that they are responsible for them.
At the heart of the role of these plans is taking a forward-looking view of the threats that
should be tackled. This is a clear change of approach. It builds from the work already done to
embed stress testing into the toolkit. Stress tests are useful but limited tools. They provide a
forecast of what we think is most likely to happen in the future conditional on a set of
assumptions on what the future will bring. There are three obvious limitations to stress tests
used on their own. First, typically they are a single point forecast of what could happen rather
than a distribution of outcomes conditional on a range of stresses. Second, because stress
tests tend to take the form of point forecasts, they assume that we can predict the form of the
next crisis, and typically they will place too much weight on the recent past to predict what
will happen next. And third, they don’t tell us what we should do about the stress. So stress
tests are useful but nowhere near sufficient.
RRPs are a big step beyond that and one that should complement stress tests. The objective
of a recovery plan should be to set out how a bank may react to a whole range of stresses
and the steps that it could plausibly take to head off the impact of these stresses in order to
avoid formal resolution actions in the event of failure. Recovery plans should encompass
contingency funding plans and the use of contingent capital instruments as well as the sale
of assets and/or business lines. They should not assume the use of extraordinary public
support. A key element of the recovery plan is that it should make management more aware
of the risks run in their businesses while they can still manage out of a stressed situation,
thus reducing the likelihood of failure. This calls for a sharper use of risk management tools
and systems. To be blunt, I have seen too many banks in the past two years where the
systems simply did not support that sort of management under stress. I should also add that
both internal and external auditors must play their full part in providing assurance that
recovery plans are robust. Recovery plans must be ready to implement if it comes to it, but
they should I hope and expect be used on a regular basis to test the robustness of business
models, by having management rigorously ask the question, “Can I recover from these
stressed scenarios with my current business model?”.
The second leg of RRPs is the resolution plan. Resolution plans must be produced and
owned by the authorities, since only we can determine how best to apply the tools of our
regime. But firms have a vital role to play in these plans. They will have the best sense of the
existence of impediments to a resolution plan, for instance the existence of negative pledges
that could obstruct emergency lending and how to remove these impediments. Second, firms
must produce and maintain the information that is necessary to enable a resolution plan to
be enacted, and understand the problems and issues that would arise in a resolution from
the way their firm operates. The last point is critical – it is not a data dump process.
There are two key objectives for resolution plans. First, to make it more straightforward and
less costly for resolution authorities to resolve firms by creating a permanent state of
readiness. Second, as a means to deal with the “too complex to resolve” state by
demonstrating where structures need to be changed. This is all about reducing the cost of
resolution and thereby the risk to the stability of the system. Just like recovery plans,
resolution plans need to be there to be used, and I can assure you that the Bank of England,
in its role as a resolution authority, will be placing great emphasis on the existence of
credible and useable resolution plans. They will be a tool for the authorities rigorously to ask

2

BIS Review 156/2009

the question, “With this structure and business model, could I achieve a resolution at an
acceptable cost”. This will be true for domestic banks and for those operating across borders,
and in the case of the latter there is a large amount of work to be done to ensure both
complete coverage of resolution regimes and that they can work together.
I have emphasised that I see RRPs as a device to enable tough questioning of structures
and business models. I want finally to illustrate the sorts of questions that should arise by
referring briefly to a couple of well known cases of the last two years or so.
Let me start with Northern Rock, the first casualty in the UK and use this case to illustrate the
role of a recovery plan. Had there been one, the Northern Rock recovery plan should have
challenged the management and the Board on how its business model could adapt to and
survive the closure of its key funding markets, given the sheer scale of its dependence on
securitisation. Likewise, how could it have handled a serious stress when it had pursued a
business model of aggressively taking market share by squeezing its net interest margin and
accepting more borrower default risk? And then moving further into the guts of the bank, how
would it deal with stress to a funding model where the bank was excessively dependent on
cash deposits from the securitisation master trust but with a hard rating agency trigger linking
that funding to the position of the bank, thus creating a severe amplification of any stress?
Finally on Northern Rock, how would the bank deal with a funding stress when it was having
to encumber such a high proportion of its good quality assets in order to over-collateralise its
securitisation master trust?
A very good example of the need for resolution plans is the case of Lehmans in Europe. Two
questions are relevant here: what should the resolution plan have contained; and what
changes to its organisation and operations might have made the massive task of dealing with
Lehmans more straightforward? You will, I hope, appreciate that I can only scratch the
surface of the Lehmans case in the time available so I apologise for the laundry list
approach. Starting with the useful content of a resolution plan: a detailed balance sheet for
all relevant corporate entities in the group at the most recent month end; a clear mapping of
financial and operational interdependencies between affiliates; wind-down plans for all
business areas linked to a comprehensive information data room; and a contact plan for
major stakeholders.
Now, listing the changes to Lehmans’ organisation and operations that should have resulted
from drawing up robust RRPs: corporate entity based accounts and management information
to supplement the business-line version (because corporate entities fail); clear segregation of
handling client asset activities; controls over depositing client money with affiliates;
employees hired by the entity for whom they work; a clear record of each entity’s title to
business and associated intellectual property; robust risk systems that allow ready
provenance of the balance sheet; contracts for the provision of key business services (eg
banking systems) that allow continuity of provision of services in the event of a resolution;
and arrangements for continuity of access to payment and settlement systems.
This has been a very brief run through some very relevant case studies. But I hope it has
illustrated the role that RRPs should play and the pressing need to have them in place. RRPs
have come a long way in a short period of time, which is both essential and gratifying. But, of
course, we haven’t actually produced any yet. This situation will not last much longer,
certainly not in the UK, because the authorities are very keen to see real implementation of
RRPs, alongside the continuing international work on them. One thing is for sure – you will
hear a lot more about Recovery and Resolution Plans. Thank you.

BIS Review 156/2009

3

Andrew Bailey: The UK bank resolution regime
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief Cashier of
the Bank of England, at The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales
(ICAEW) Financial Services Faculty breakfast, London, 26 November 2009.
I am grateful to Peter Brierley, Victoria Cleland, Iain De Weymarn, Geoff Davies, Tony Foster, Andrew Hauser,
Orla May and Paul Tucker for their comments and assistance.

*

*

*

The UK bank resolution regime
Thank you for inviting me to speak this morning. One of the characteristics of bank
resolutions, to which I will return later, is that they have to be done quickly to a fixed deadline
and involve working through the night. They also require extensive involvement by
accountants and lawyers, so, I have had some experience with spending nights and early
mornings with accountants. The only, but important difference, is that I don’t get to choose
when to spend my early mornings on resolutions, whereas you did choose to listen to me
early this morning, for which I am very grateful.
Some history
The 2009 Banking Act, passed in February, created the new bank resolution regime in the
UK. In its first nine months it has been used once, at the end of March for the Dunfermline
Building Society. There is a long history of involvement by the Bank of England in dealing
with the problems of banks in the UK in order to underpin the stability of the financial system,
much longer than the history of banking supervision. The history of the Bank in the
nineteenth century features quite a few such interventions. More recently, although none
came amid conditions comparable to those which occurred last autumn, the Bank was
extensively involved in resolving problems in the secondary banking crisis of the 1970s, in
Johnson Matthey Bankers in the 1980s, and then in the early 90s with a number of smaller
banks. My own first involvement with resolving banks came at that time, with the resolution of
National Mortgage Bank.
We now face a much bigger challenge in terms of building a more robust financial system.
There are three parts to this task: regulation, structure and resolution. Today, I am going to
talk about the last of these. In the past, our resolution toolkit was limited. We could use the
Bank of England’s own financial resources, as we did with Johnson Matthey Bankers and
National Mortgage Bank. Or, we could determine that it was not necessary to provide
financial support on grounds of a threat to the financial system, but nonetheless that it would
be helpful to facilitate the orderly winding-up of an institution by undertaking what I would call
“mopping up activities” of a type which only a central bank can typically undertake because it
provides a safe house and neutral party. This was the case with Barings, in which I was also
heavily involved.
There is therefore nothing new about bank resolution.
Why have a resolution regime for banks?
Why do we need a special resolution regime for banks? The first reason is that at the point
when actions have to be taken to deal with a bank in difficulty, there will inevitably be a
considerable amount of uncertainty about how bad that bank’s problems are. This is because
the scale of the problem will depend on how the future unfolds. But we will know at that point
that if the authorities don’t act, the problems of the institution will quickly get much worse,
and a deposit run may well ensue. The second reason for a special resolution regime is that
the process of resolution itself must not add to the uncertainty and loss of confidence. Put

BIS Review 157/2009

1

simply, it has to be fast and decisive. Most bank resolutions happen over weekends. My
overwhelming guiding principle is that by no later than first thing on Monday morning we
must be able to tell depositors that their money is safe and its new home is …… There is a
simple test of this – the answer to the depositor’s question “Is my money safe?” must be yes
– no hesitation or qualification can be added.
Normal corporate insolvency procedures are therefore inadequate for banks for a number of
reasons. First, because they can only be initiated at the point of insolvency, whereas a loss
of confidence in a bank by its depositors will often precede that point. Second, normal
insolvency procedures are not well suited to ensuring continuity of key banking functions,
particularly access of depositors to their funds, but also the provision of credit. Third, a bank
failure may involve substantial negative spill over and externalities – for instance to other
banks via their inter-connectedness. But in normal insolvency procedures these externalities
would not be taken into account when determining what to do in insolvency. Fourth,
depositors play a special role as creditors of a bank. Unlike the creditors of a typical
company, they are very numerous in number, most are not professional market participants,
and their claims in the bank are in the form of money.
The recent experience in the UK
These are therefore strong reasons for treating the resolution of banks differently. But we
didn’t start in this position at the onset of the financial crisis in 2007. At the time of the start of
Northern Rock’s problems, the UK did not have a special resolution regime; rather, we were
relying on the tools of the past. Northern Rock was a good example of a bank that had a
liquidity problem, caused by the closure of its major funding market, for residential mortgage
backed securities, and had a heightened probability of experiencing a solvency problem in
the future. In my view, if we were faced with the same problem today now that we have a
special resolution regime for banks, there is little doubt that Northern Rock could have failed
in an orderly way under the resolution regime. But this wasn’t possible in September 2007.
And given the number and size of depositors, Northern Rock could not be allowed to fail in a
way that would have jeopardised the funds of those depositors. It was therefore a stark
illustration of the need for a resolution regime.
In February last year emergency legislation was introduced in the form of the Banking
Special Provisions Act, or BSPA, which created a temporary resolution regime, temporary
insofar as the BSPA had a one year sunset clause. The BSPA, which facilitated taking
Northern Rock into temporary public ownership, also contained broad powers for the
Treasury, as the lead authority in that regime, to protect financial stability and the public
interest by statutory transfers of the property of UK banks. The Treasury was also able to
override or modify contractual property rights in order to give itself more room for manoeuvre.
Creating this regime turned out to have been prescient, because in September of last year it
was used to resolve Bradford and Bingley by transferring part of its business, namely
Bradford and Bingley’s deposit taking activities, to Santander, leaving the rest in public
ownership. The BSPA therefore enabled a new home to be found for the deposits over the
course of a weekend. It also included an important mechanism to ensure business continuity,
whereby a bank could be broken up over a weekend and this would not cause chaos in the
bank’s operations because a clear agreement was reached over the weekend for the
continuing supply of services by the rump to Santander in order to make sure that it was
business as usual on Monday morning for the transferred business.
The new regime
The BSPA contained broad powers, on the basis that it was temporary. Thus in February this
year the new Banking Act came into force and created a permanent and more wide ranging
special resolution regime or SRR for deposit takers incorporated in the UK. It is therefore a
big and very welcome step forward.

2

BIS Review 157/2009

The SRR has five objectives: to maintain financial stability; to protect confidence in the
banking sector; to protect depositors in banks; to protect public funds; and to avoid interfering
with property rights in contravention of the European Convention on Human Rights. These
five objectives are not ranked in order of importance; rather, in each resolution case, a
judgment needs to be made on how to balance these objectives taking into account the
particular circumstances of the case.
The SRR provides a number of tools to deal with a bank. The first test that must be applied is
to assess whether the public interest objectives could be met by implementing a rapid payout
of insured deposits, or any other definition of deposits which the authorities wish to protect
via a top-up extension of the deposit insurance scheme. The remainder of the bank would
then be put through something known as the bank insolvency procedure. The test of whether
this procedure could be used depends in large part on how long depositors would face
without access to their funds. At the moment I think few banks could meet an acceptable
timetable for payout. Moreover, for bigger banks this would always be too disruptive as an
approach. Work is underway to facilitate rapid payout of depositors under the Financial
Services Compensation Scheme and I hope that in the next year, banks will be able to meet
the objective that they have been given by the FSA to be able to make payouts to depositors
within seven days. This is not a trivial task as I readily recognise, and achieving it would not
mean that this approach would always be chosen in a resolution. That depends on the
situation at the time.
If the failure of a bank is determined to have wider systemic consequences that could
undermine financial stability, confidence in the banking system or depositor protection, then
the SRR provides a range of other tools to be used. It is possible to direct part or all of a
failing bank’s business to a private sector purchaser after a sale process has been
undertaken. Second, it is possible for the Bank of England to take control of part or all of a
bank’s business through a bridge bank controlled and owned by the Bank. A special bank
administration procedure can be used in combination with a partial property transfer or bridge
bank. This administration procedure is broadly the same as a conventional administration
save for the very important difference that the administrator has a statutory objective to
support the transferred business with any infrastructure left in the insolvent rump. Finally,
under the SRR provisions, it is possible to take a bank into temporary public ownership. For
this approach, the Treasury would be in the lead, and there is a higher test of systemic
importance to be passed (there must be a serious threat to financial stability) for this
approach to be used.
As I have indicated, the SRR contains important roles for all of the authorities. The FSA is
responsible for triggering the SRR by determining, broadly, that a bank no longer meets its
threshold conditions for authorisation, and there is no reasonable prospect of it taking actions
to correct the situation within an acceptable timeframe. The FSA is also responsible for
approving the transfer of business to another institution that it authorises.
The Bank of England is responsible for operation of the SRR (with the exception of
Temporary Public Ownership, where the Treasury is responsible). The Bank will consult the
FSA and Treasury before selecting the SRR tool to be used, and we need to obtain the
agreement of the Treasury to the implications of the chosen tool for the use of public funds.
Also, the Bank can make recommendations to the FSA when it feels that the SRR should be
triggered, though as I have said, the decision is for the FSA.
Finally the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) plays an important role in the
resolution process. This would be very obvious if an actual payout of depositors was chosen
and the FSCS would work very closely with the administrator. They also have a prior role in
assessing whether payout is feasible in a reasonable time. But the FSCS can also be
requested to contribute to the cost of other forms of resolution up to the net amount it would
have failed to recover in insolvency if there was an actual payout. This approach can be
used, for example, where there has been a transfer of deposits – and the FSCS can provide

BIS Review 157/2009

3

a suitable deposit to contribute to the immediate cost to the authorities. The FSCS does not
however operate a pre-funded scheme in which money is available on call to provide such a
substitute deposit. It may therefore have to borrow from the Treasury in order to contribute to
the immediate cost of the resolution (as in Bradford & Bingley), with the FSCS contribution
ultimately amounting to the cost of any eventual shortfall in recoveries. The FSCS is
therefore an important part of the overall resolution landscape, and I will come back at the
end of my remarks to consider how these arrangements might develop.
It is important to ensure that a regime like the SRR contains appropriate protections. At the
heart of it is the ability given to the Bank to alter the treatment of property rights from the
base of normal insolvency law. When the Act was being drafted, the lawyers talked a great
deal about avoiding “Henry VIII” powers. I thought that this might have something to do with
having the power to chop off heads. But that was not the case; rather, it derives from Henry’s
dissolution and seizure of the monasteries, which was an extreme case of intervention in
property rights. The Bank of England’s Special Resolution Unit takes on a more temporal role
in its treatment of property rights, and one – you will be pleased to hear – that is shaped by
secondary legislation to provide safeguards and a Code of Practice. I think we can be quite
confident that Henry VIII saw no need for a code of practice.
The safeguards in our regime were drawn up in consultation with practitioners. They can be
divided into two categories: restrictions on the use of the SRR powers; and mechanisms for
payment of compensation where property rights are unreasonably affected by the use of the
special resolution powers. In the case of the restrictions, there is protection for netting and
set-off arrangements, secured obligations and capital market instruments such as covered
bonds and securitisations, to ensure that they are not disrupted by the transfer powers. This
is an important part of the regime, and I want to emphasise that it is not in the interests of the
authorities to disrupt instruments and markets that are of course of great importance to other
banks. It would just be counterproductive to take that sort of action.
In the case of compensation, the framework established by the Act ensures that the
proceeds of the sale of a bank’s business are returned to the failed bank’s creditors and, if
any surplus remains, to the shareholders, after meeting the claims of creditors in priority
order. Moreover, creditors left behind in an insolvent entity – typically the rump of the
business after other parts are transferred – are entitled to receive compensation to the extent
that an independent valuer determines that they have received less than they would have
done if the bank had gone into insolvency without the SRR being used. This is the “No
creditor worse off” safeguard.
The Code of Practice provides guidance on a number of areas, including how the SRR
objectives are to be achieved, factors guiding the choice between different tools, how to
determine that it is not reasonably likely that action can be taken by or in respect of a bank to
bring it into compliance with the FSA’s threshold conditions – ie how to determine that the
SRR should be triggered, how to determine the basis for calculating compensation where
applicable, and the principles by which the Bank of England should run a bridge bank.
Beyond all of these provisions, the Banking Liaison Panel, whose members include industry
bodies, lawyers and insolvency practitioners, in addition to HMT, the Bank and FSA is
responsible for providing advice on the wider effects of the resolution regime.
The resolution of the Dunfermline Building Society
The first, and so far only, use of the resolution regime was for the Dunfermline Building
Society at the end of March. Our tally of one is in sharp contrast to the US, where to date this
year the FDIC has carried out 124 resolutions of failing banks. The US does, of course, have
a much less concentrated banking industry.
Dunfermline was, almost needless to say, a very instructive first case to handle. We
achieved the key objective of a weekend transfer of depositors, branches and the head

4

BIS Review 157/2009

office, on this occasion to Nationwide Building Society. We also managed to transfer the
prime mortgage assets over the weekend, also to Nationwide. This was an achievement,
because necessarily the due diligence process is more complex for assets than deposit
liabilities. The worse quality assets – mainly commercial property loans and bought-in
mortgages – were placed into a building society special administration procedure (the
building society version of a BAP). But the social housing loan book (for which Dunfermline
was the second largest provider in Scotland) and some associated deposits were taken into
a bridge bank owned and run by the Bank of England. We ran the bridge bank for three
months while a sale process took place.
Dunfermline was therefore a case where we managed to use three of our tools in one go –
the transfer powers, BAP and a bridge bank. To give you an idea of the pressure under
which resolutions are done, the Dunfermline weekend involved an M&A process, the
completion of around 50 legal agreements including a three-way transitional services
agreement, setting up a new bridge bank, and putting in place communications to depositors
and other stakeholders in order to ensure that branches and call centres etc opened for
business as usual on Monday morning. And, there is a very human dimension to all of this.
My own colleagues, our advisors and our colleagues in the other authorities have to work
under great stress to get a successful resolution in place. But we also have to remember that
we need to work with the staff of the bank, to help them to deal with the shock of the
resolution taking place, usually following a very difficult period in which the bank has been
under great stress, and through all of that ensure that the doors open on Monday morning. I
am lucky to have very talented colleagues in the Bank and the other authorities and advisors
who don’t mind the stress and the risk, or at least that’s what they tell me.
Issues arising
The resolution of Dunfermline was in my opinion a success: on Monday morning depositors
knew their money was safe. But it illustrated well the difficulties of resolving banks.
Resolution is after all invasive surgery on a bank. I want therefore to highlight a number of
areas where in my view more work is needed to hone our regime further.
The first concerns funding of the FSCS. In my view we should be doing everything we can to
minimise the reliance of the industry on public money, this is just not an acceptable state of
affairs. One thing that can be done over the coming years, but gradually, is to pre-fund the
FSCS with industry contributions. This would reduce the need for the FSCS to borrow from
government and would provide a larger bulwark before the use of public money has to be
contemplated. It is welcome that the Government supports pre-funding. There is a further
issue of whether and how this pre-funding should be calculated, and in particular whether it
should be done on a basis which takes into account the riskiness of each bank and thus the
probability of causing a call on the FSCS. Since the FSCS is an insurance scheme, there is
clearly a case for calculating the premium on a basis that reflects risk. But a lot more thinking
is needed before we can be sure that this can be done in an appropriate way.
The second area in which we need to work to ensure that the resolution regime is as good as
we can get it concerns the whole area of safeguards. There is a natural tension between the
desire for precision in defining the protection of property rights at a very detailed level and
the need for flexibility in a regime that has to be able to react to the situations that come our
way. We don’t get to choose the problems we face. I recognise that tension. I don’t have a
radical plan for changing the current regime, but I recognise that we have to keep a very
careful eye on striking the right balance between having the discretion to deal with problems
and ensuring that banks and markets know as much as they can about what we would, and
would not, do in a resolution. This is why the Code and the Liaison Panel are important parts
of the machinery.
The third area in which more work is needed concerns information and advance planning. In
recent years the Bank has been forcefully arguing the importance of information gathering to

BIS Review 157/2009

5

the government and FSA. In my experience resolution work is like icebergs – I don’t mean
that in the sense that banks are about to hit them. It is like icebergs in the sense that a vast
amount of the work done is beneath the surface, hidden from view. Because resolution is an
invasive form of surgery, it requires a very large amount of information to be carried out
safely. Moreover, the planning work has to be done quietly, out of sight in order to avoid
fuelling the failure of the bank, and it needs to start well in advance of the actual resolution
weekend. As the authority responsible for resolution operations, the Bank of England faces a
tension. In the ideal world, we want to work closely with the management of the bank to plan
a resolution, at a time when it remains a contingency option that management naturally wish
to avoid. But we also have to avoid the sense that a bank is receiving the attention of the
undertakers. A very important development here will be the production and maintenance of
resolution plans, as part of the overall recovery and resolution plans, or living wills. I spoke
on this subject last week, and the text is available on the Bank of England website, so I am
not going to labour the point today. But the general principle is that resolution is a very
information hungry activity. To give an example, the FDIC in the US has recently adopted a
rule requiring deposit takers to provide detailed information on their derivatives positions
within a 60-day period after being notified by the Authorities to do so. The rule was only
introduced earlier this year but it will be worth considering a similar approach in the UK.
Finally, there is a large missing piece to what I have said about the resolution regime, namely
how it would deal with banks that operate with branches or subsidiaries in other countries,
and likewise how foreign banks operating in the UK would be sorted out. There is now a
great deal of attention on this issue, in the G20, in the EU and via the FSB working group on
cross-border crisis management chaired by Paul Tucker, and rightly so. I think it is fair to say
that the regimes in the US, Canada, Japan and the UK come closest at present to meeting a
kite-mark standard, but more needs to be done in continental Europe. I therefore support the
recent European Commission consultation calling for EU countries to adopt resolution
regimes. Also, I think that we are much more likely to make progress in this field by agreeing
on how national regimes can fit together to deal with international banks, rather than trying to
devise an international resolution regime. The key issue then is burden-sharing, and that
together the national regimes provide for equitable treatment of creditors whatever their
domicile. A robust set of resolution regimes should not allow for bias in favour of domestic
creditors. The UK, I should stress, is not one of those countries, but we are keen to work to
produce a framework of resolution regimes that allows bias in favour of domestic creditors to
end.
Thank you for listening to an account of the UK resolution regime. It is an important
development as part of making our banks more robust to failure. It sits alongside enhanced
regulation and supervision, and whatever structural changes may take place in the industry.
But it remains work in progress, and in an important respect always will be because it needs
to be ready to respond to threats that will evolve as well. And, finally, I should tell you my
motto as head of the resolution unit, namely that I am happiest when we don’t need to
perform a resolution.

6

BIS Review 157/2009

Spencer Dale: 2009 – a review of the economic year
Remarks by Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of
England, at the Chairman’s Annual Breakfast, Essex Institute of Directors, Billericay,
2 December 2009.
*

*

*

I would like to thank Rohan Churm, Julia Giese and Chris Young for their considerable help in preparing these
remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary
Policy Committee.

Introduction
Thank you for the invitation to speak to you this morning.
On the occasion of the Chairman’s Annual breakfast, I thought it would be fitting to look back
over the events of the past year. A year which started with our country – together with much
of the rest of the world – in economic freefall. A year in which many firms and families
suffered significant hardship, as output fell markedly and unemployment rose. But a year
which is ending with signs that the economy is stabilising and has turned a corner on the
road to recovery.
Financial crisis and collapse in confidence
The financial crisis obviously predates the beginning of this year. The first signs of the
instability can be traced back to at least the summer of 2007, when the emerging sub-prime
mortgage crisis in the United States and the resulting pressure on banks’ balance sheets
around the world led to a sharp tightening in the availability of credit. But the severity of the
crisis increased dramatically following the failure of Lehman Brothers in the autumn of 2008.
Confidence in the very essence of banking – as well as in individual financial institutions –
was shaken to its core and the most severe banking crisis for almost a century was triggered.
As we now know, this led to a deep and highly synchronised global recession. Output in
virtually every corner of the world fell sharply. Global trade flows contracted by a staggering
15% in the two quarters following the failure of Lehmans. Over the same period, output at
home is estimated to have fallen by 4 1/4% – the largest fall in UK GDP over a two-quarter
period since quarterly records began.
The speed and severity of the downturn cannot be explained solely by the tightening in credit
conditions. The impact of the banking crisis was greatly amplified by the accompanying
collapse in business and household confidence.
Firms’ concerns about their ability to access the working capital needed to run their
businesses was compounded by the bleak and uncertain prospects for demand. In response,
production was slashed and business spending was severely curtailed. Stock levels were run
down at an unprecedented pace, as companies met demand from existing inventories and
economised on working capital. Faced with growing spare capacity there was little incentive
for businesses to invest in new plant and machinery, and capital expenditure contracted by
almost 20% in the first six months of 2009 alone. The retrenchment of companies was also
evident in the labour market as firms laid off employees, reduced working hours and bore
down on earnings. Wage freezes became commonplace.
Similarly, households pulled back sharply on their spending and increased their savings. This
retrenchment by households was partially driven by the slowing in earnings growth and the
fall in asset prices. But it was amplified by the pronounced rise in fears of unemployment and
the increased uncertainty about the economic outlook.

BIS Review 159/2009

1

Risk of vicious downward spiral
The fall in households’ and firms’ confidence proved mutually reinforcing and, to some
extent, self-fulfilling: both households and firms expected conditions to weaken sharply and
both cut back on spending. The contraction in consumer expenditure helped to validate firms’
concerns about future demand. Likewise, the falls in employment and squeeze on incomes
reinforced households’ fears about future earnings prospects. And the worsening economic
environment in turn exacerbated the weakness of the banking system. As the quality of
banks’ loan books deteriorated, the supply of bank credit tightened even further.
Individually, this pulling back on the part of households, firms and banks made sense. But,
collectively, it threatened a vicious downward spiral: the fact that each part of the economy
was retrenching at the same time risked a collapse of aggregate spending in the economy. In
turn, this raised the spectre of price deflation and all its associated ills.
Policy response
In such situations, it falls to policy to break the ensuing vicious cycle.
This lesson had been sorely learned from the Great Depression. The magnitude of the
shocks hitting the world economy over the past year or so – as measured for example by the
initial contraction in global industrial production – appears comparable with the Great
Depression of the 1930s. 1 But, in the Great Depression, global industrial output declined
fairly continuously for three full years. In contrast, global industrial output on this occasion
seems to have broadly stabilised in a little over a year.
There are many differences between now and the 1930s. However, I have little doubt that
one of the key factors contributing to the quicker stabilisation of activity this time around has
been the speed and decisiveness with which policy throughout the world responded to the
twin threats of a failing banking system and falling confidence.
At home, the Monetary Policy Committee cut interest rates from 5% to 0.5% in just six
months. And with interest rates close to their lower bound, the Committee in March of this
year voted to start a programme of asset purchases financed by the issuance of central bank
reserves, otherwise known as “quantitative easing”.
These extraordinary actions were intended to reduce the risk of inflation falling below the 2%
inflation target that the Bank of England is mandated to meet. They do so in a number of
ways. The reduction in Bank Rate by lowering interest payments on loans has improved
many companies’ cash flows at a time when turnover is weak and working capital is scarce.
A similar effect has operated for households: borrowers with floating rate mortgages in
particular have seen their monthly repayments fall sharply. More generally, by reducing the
returns on saving, the fall in interest rates has encouraged households and businesses to
spend.
The MPC’s programme of asset purchases has further stimulated demand by injecting
additional money directly into the economy. The Bank’s purchases of government bonds
encourage investors to diversify into alternative assets, such as corporate bonds and
equities. The Bank is also operating directly in commercial paper and corporate bond
markets to improve the functioning of those markets. Both actions have helped to boost the
prices of corporate assets, reducing yields and lowering the cost to companies of raising
funds in capital markets. This in turn should help to stimulate increased spending.
The dramatic easing in monetary policy occurred alongside a range of Government policies.
Most importantly, the Government’s actions to provide both capital and liquidity were

1

2

See Eichengreen and O’Rourke (2009). Romer (2009) makes a similar point.

BIS Review 159/2009

instrumental in stabilising the banking system. The temporary reduction in VAT and the car
scrappage scheme have boosted household spending and provided short-term support to
retailers and the car industry. And the Government’s Business Payment Support Service has
reportedly enabled almost a quarter of a million small and medium-sized firms to delay tax
payments.
There are encouraging signs that these policy actions have been successful and the risk of a
severe adverse feedback loop – as households, companies and banks simultaneously try to
retrench – has been avoided. The banking system has stabilised. Measures of business and
household confidence have recovered significantly. And the most recent ONS estimates for
the third quarter suggest that the contraction in consumer and business spending may be
beginning to abate.
Corporate liquidations and unemployment: better than feared
The prompt and large policy actions are likely to be one reason why corporate failures have,
to date, not increased by as much as might have been feared. Although output has fallen by
more than in either the 1980s or 1990s recessions, liquidations have risen by less than at the
same stage of those downturns. Companies have benefited from the fall in debt servicing
costs associated with the sharp reduction in Bank Rate and by the Government scheme
allowing them to defer tax payments. And by supporting corporate credit markets, the Bank’s
asset purchase programme has also helped some firms to bypass banks and access capital
markets directly. I fully recognise that the asset purchase programme has not been as of
much help to many small and medium-sized enterprises – many of whom are represented
here today – who are not able to access capital markets and are largely reliant on bank
credit. However, I would contend that even the SME sector has benefited indirectly from the
programme of asset purchases, such as from the accompanying fall in Libor rates.
In a similar vein, although there has been a substantial fall in employment over the past year
or so, the extent of the job losses to date has, if anything, been less than we might have
feared given the falls in output. This may partly reflect the greater degree of wage flexibility
that has been apparent in this recession compared to that in either the 1980s or 1990s. 2 A
substantial element of the workforce appears to have been able to protect their jobs by
accepting slower wage growth.
By comparison with the past, these relatively limited increases in liquidations and
unemployment are likely to have been important in mitigating the severity of the downturn.
Large numbers of corporate failures are very damaging to the economy, with the loss of the
skills and experience that firms have built up over the years, as well as of their investment in
machinery and equipment, and with the shedding of jobs. Indeed, the relatively muted
increase in company liquidations in this recession may have helped to limit the falls in
employment. Moreover, the fact that more of the burden of firms’ adjustment to the recession
has been spread over the workforce as a whole in the form of lower wages, rather than being
concentrated on those losing their jobs, is likely to have lessened the fall in consumption.
This is both because households may find it easier to borrow to smooth their consumption if
they still have a job and because it may have limited the extent to which households
increased their savings as a precaution against the possibility of future job loss.
Structural adjustments
But the response of policy and the emerging recovery should not obscure the fact that
structural adjustments need to occur in our economy. The banking system faces a significant

2

For more information see the box on page 29 of the August Inflation Report.

BIS Review 159/2009

3

challenge to wean itself off the current substantial levels of official support and to return to a
position in which it can lend normally. Households may need to re-evaluate their financial
positions in the face of the more uncertain economic environment. And the need for a
substantial reduction in the fiscal deficit is clear.
Monetary policy cannot and should not prevent those adjustments from happening. They are
necessary for the long-run health and stability of our economy. Rather, the job of monetary
policy is to ensure that these adjustments occur in as orderly a manner as possible and
within an economic environment which is consistent with hitting the 2% inflation target.
Prospects for 2010 and beyond
So what does the next year hold in store?
The economy appears to have turned. Although output is estimated to have contracted in the
third quarter of this year, there is a range of evidence from business surveys, from the Bank’s
regional Agents, and from recent indicators that the economy has begun to stabilise and that
we are likely to be moving into a period of renewed expansion.
Whenever an economy is in recession, especially a recession as deep as this one, it can be
hard to see where growth will eventually come from. However, as I have discussed, the
easing in monetary and fiscal policy is providing considerable support to the emerging
recovery. That stimulus is reinforced by the substantial depreciation of sterling. Sterling is
around a quarter below its mid-2007 level and – as many of you here today will know from
your own experiences – this has helped to improve the ability of UK companies to compete in
both overseas and domestic markets. Output will also receive a further fillip as the
adjustment of inventories by companies runs it course.
However, the on-going structural adjustments that I mentioned are likely to give rise to a
number of economic headwinds that may impede the recovery. Credit conditions are likely to
remain tight for some time as banks repair their balance sheets. And the need for public and
household finances to adjust to the changed economic environment will weigh on spending.
Balancing these factors, my view of the outlook for GDP growth is in line with the projections
contained in the Bank’s Inflation Report published last month. It is likely that, as the recovery
takes hold, output will grow at rates above its historical trend for a while. But this growth
needs to be seen in the context of the sharp fall in the level of output over the past eighteen
months and the margin of spare capacity that was opened up as a result. The recovery in the
level of economic activity is likely to be relatively slow.
CPI inflation looks set to increase sharply in the near term, reflecting higher petrol price
inflation and the reversal of last year’s temporary reduction in VAT. Indeed, it is quite
possible that the Governor will have to write a letter to the Chancellor early in the New Year
explaining why inflation is more than one percentage point above the inflation target. But
monetary policy can do very little to affect these short-term movements in inflation. Further
out, the downward pressure from the persistent margin of spare capacity is likely to cause
inflation to fall back below the 2% inflation target, although this pressure should gradually
fade as the economy recovers.
Implications for policy
What implications does this have for the stance of monetary policy?
At our most recent meeting in November, the Monetary Policy Committee voted to maintain
Bank Rate at 0.5% and to increase the scale of asset purchases to £200 billion. However,
you may have noticed that there was a split vote amongst the Committee last month, and
that I voted to maintain the scale of the asset purchase programme at £175 billion.

4

BIS Review 159/2009

It is important not to make too much of this difference. I fully recognised the potential benefits
of a more expansionary policy given the downside risks to the economy. However, I was also
wary of the potential risks of such a policy. My main concern reflected the considerable
uncertainty about the degree of spare capacity in the economy and the behaviour of inflation
when output is growing at above trend rates. These uncertainties are always present, but
come to the fore in situations like the current environment in which there is a very substantial
degree of economic slack. In order to keep inflation on track to hit the inflation target this
slack needs to be eliminated. However, given the uncertainties about the precise margin of
spare capacity and the behaviour of inflation as this spare capacity is being closed, my
preference was to aim to grow the economy a little less rapidly.
I was also concerned that further substantial injections of liquidity might result in unwarranted
increases in some asset prices. I should stress that I do not think there is any strong
evidence to suggest that any of the increases in asset prices seen to date are out of line with
the improving economic outlook and the desired impact of our asset purchase programme.
Rather, I was conscious that the current stance of monetary policy – in which Bank Rate is
very low and substantial amounts of liquidity are being injected into the economy – increases
the likelihood that asset prices may move out of line with their fundamental values and that
this could be costly to rectify were it to occur. It is a risk that we need to be alert to.
However, as I suggested, it is important not to make too much of these differences; all MPC
members – myself included – were of the view that a significant degree of monetary stimulus
needed to be maintained in order to meet the inflation target.
Conclusion
The economy has come a long way over the past year. At the time of this annual breakfast a
year ago, output was in freefall, the banking system was in near meltdown, business and
consumer confidence had evaporated, and there was a very real risk of a serious economic
depression. Monetary policy has played a critical role in the stabilisation of the economy. We
have turned a corner on the road to recovery. But there is a long way to go with many
challenges ahead as the economy moves into better balance. In facing these challenges, the
Monetary Policy Committee will do whatever it takes to ensure that inflation remains on track
to hit the target.
References
Eichengreen, B. and K.H. O’Rourke (2009), “A Tale of
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/3421, 1 September 2009.

Two

Depressions”,

Romer, C.D. (2009), “Back from the Brink”,
http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/cea/BackFromTheBrink, speech given at
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 24 September 2009.

BIS Review 159/2009

5

Andrew Bailey: Banknotes in circulation – still rising. What does this
mean for the future of cash?
Keynote address by Mr Andrew Bailey, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief
Cashier of the Bank of England, to the Banknote 2009 conference, Washington DC,
6 December 2009.
*

*

*

I am grateful to Helen Allen, Nikki Brownlie, Victoria Cleland, Nick Davey, Andrew Dent, Iain de Weymarn, Lee
Dobney, Andrew Hauser, Matthew Hunt, Orla May, Sally Reid and Andrew Wardlow for their comments and
assistance.

It is a great pleasure to be the keynote speaker at Banknote 2009. I want to use my time
today to consider the implications of developments in banknote circulation for the future of
cash. In particular, I am going to examine what I regard as the apparent paradox of
banknotes, namely that the value of notes in circulation continues to rise, while the evidence
we have suggests that the use of banknotes as a payment mechanism is declining gently,
not I should say dramatically. I am going to illustrate this using our experience of Bank of
England banknotes. There are three parts to my remarks. I am going to begin by describing
trends in banknote circulation and use. Then I will consider the paradox in these trends.
Finally, I will draw out some key challenges that we face in managing the circulation of Bank
of England notes. Let me say at the outset that my very clear objective in terms of Bank of
England notes is to maintain the integrity of our banknotes, and an important part of that is
meeting the public demand. I am not trying to promote or kill our notes.
The trends in banknote circulation and use
I am going to talk about trends in banknote circulation in the context of the roles of money, as
a medium of exchange (payments) and a store of value. Chart 1 illustrates the pattern of the
total value of Bank of England notes in circulation over the last forty years. The striking thing
is the acceleration of growth over the last fifteen years. This may come as something of a
surprise to the “cash is dead” lobby. This chart suggests that nothing could be further from
the truth. The total value of our circulation was around £15bn in the mid 1990s, while today it
is around £45bn. As the chart also shows, this increase can for the most part be attributed to
one denomination, the £20 note.

BIS Review 162/2009

1

But it is important to put this increase in notes in circulation into context. Chart 2 does this by
plotting the value of notes in circulation as a share of the nominal GDP of the UK, again over
the last forty years. What we now see is a decline in the value of notes from 6% of nominal
GDP in 1970 to a low point of 2.4% in the mid-1990s. Since then, there has been a
stabilisation and small increase, followed by a noticeable increase over the last two years, to
3.2% of nominal GDP. We can tell a story about inflation in the UK economy to explain the
long-run trend. The decline in the stock of notes in circulation relative to nominal GDP came
in the high inflation period of the 1970s, running on into the early 80s. As inflation erodes the
value of the currency, the incentive to hold banknotes declined markedly in a period of high
inflation. Likewise, this was a period that saw a marked decline in the use of cash for wage
payments. The move to an environment of low inflation has subsequently stabilised that
situation.

This pattern of the note issue as a percentage of nominal GDP reveals that something quite
noticeable has happened over the last two years. Chart 3 focuses on this development by
plotting the course of the note issue to GDP percentage over the recessions of the early
1980s and early 1990s and the current experience. The contrast of the current experience is
striking. Two features of the current situation strike me as most relevant in explaining this
development: first, lower levels of public confidence in the banking system; and second, very
low interest rates which thereby reduce the opportunity cost of holding banknotes (as a noninterest bearing asset).

2

BIS Review 162/2009

I should add two important points at this stage. First, my understanding is that this pattern
over the last two years is reflected in other major currencies. Second, as I will come back to
later, banknotes are central-bank money in a form that can be held by the public, in other
words the retail equivalent of reserve accounts at the central bank, the latter being wholesale
central-bank money. Banknotes are therefore a non-interest bearing store of value. In the
current recession, the demand for banknotes has risen, and it is likely that this reflects
demand for central-bank money as a store of value. We can add some further evidence to
support this story by looking at the pattern of behaviour of the various denominations of Bank
of England notes. We issue four denominations – £5, £10, £20 and £50. Chart 4 shows the
growth rate of each denomination over the last nearly four years. The striking feature of this
chart is the growth rate of the highest denomination note, the £50, which had picked up from
the onset of the financial crisis in the summer of 2007, and then rose further from last
autumn, in the wake of the failure of Lehman. Since the summer of 2007, the total value of
our £50 notes in circulation has risen from £7bn to £9bn. Again, I believe this is a pattern
seen in the high denomination notes of other currencies. Chart 5 shows the same story, but
this time expressing it in terms of the contribution of each denomination to overall growth.
The yellow contribution shows the role of the £50. This strikes me as pretty good prima facie
evidence that there has been an increase in demand for banknotes as a store of value.

BIS Review 162/2009

3

So far, I have told the story of trends in demand for banknotes over the last forty years in
terms more of the macroeconomics of demand for notes as central bank money. Now I want
to turn to the more micro elements of banknote use. The first thing to say here, as Chart 6
illustrates, is that over the last twenty years there has been a major change in the method of
distributing banknotes to the public. At the start of the 1990s there were under 20,000 ATMs
in the UK, whereas now the number is over 60,000. Since the beginning of the current
decade, the major growth has been among the independent ATM deployers, as opposed to
financial institution operated machines.

4

BIS Review 162/2009

And as Chart 7 shows, ATM withdrawals now account for around 70% of all cash
acquisitions by individuals in the UK, compared with 25% in the early 1990s. We can all
observe around us the growth of the ATM industry, but it is worth considering how influential
it has been on the circulation of banknotes. First, the rise of the ATM has fundamentally
changed and modernised the distribution of what is sometimes regarded as an old-fashioned
means of payment. Second, it is likely that the growth of ATMs may have led to an increase
in notes in circulation for another reason.

BIS Review 162/2009

5

When we talk to ATM operators about their business model they stress that the least
acceptable outcome is for their ATMs to run out of notes. As a consequence, ATMs are restocked well before they run out. This means that the overall ATM estate is holding what
could be described as idle inventory stock, but these are defined as notes in circulation. But I
should be clear that I don’t have enough evidence to prove to you that the stock:output ratio
for banknotes has gone up, which would run counter to the story in almost all other
industries.
I want to move on now to trends in cash usage (I am using “cash” here to mean banknotes
and coin). Chart 8 shows survey evidence for the use of cash in retail transactions in the UK
over the last 25 years. In terms of the share of the total volume of transactions, cash has
fallen from over 80% in the mid 1980s to 60% currently. In value terms, cash accounted for
around 9% of all retail transactions in the early 1990s, whereas it is around 4% currently.
Cash is generally used for small-value transactions. The latest evidence suggests that the
average value of a cash transaction is around £9, with 93% of payments under £5 being
made in cash. One in five adults in the UK report that they use only cash for day-to-day
transactions, with this group heavily focused on teenagers/young adults and the elderly. The
survey evidence also indicates that more credit-constrained individuals prefer to use cash, as
a budgeting tool based, I think, on the principle that with cash you can only spend what you
have.

The paradox of banknotes
This quick survey of trends in banknote demand and use leaves us with what I regard as the
paradox of banknotes. The total value of Bank of England banknotes in circulation continues
to rise, but their use in transactions is falling gradually. To recap, I have put forward some
arguments that seek to explain this paradox. From a macroeconomic perspective, sustained
low inflation has increased confidence in the real value of the currency, while more recently
demand for banknotes has risen during this recession, and particularly for high denomination
notes, reflecting loss of confidence in banks, and very low interest rates. ATMs have
changed banknote issuance. And, banknote use is more concentrated among the young, the

6

BIS Review 162/2009

elderly, and those on low incomes. I would add one other thought on the demand for
banknotes, which is more to do with human psychology. I suspect most people, however
much they use cards, feel a degree of comfort from knowing that they also have cash in their
wallet or purse, even if it is as a back-up.
What does this analysis tell us about future demand for cash? As a central bank responsible
for the issuance of banknotes, two principles are at the front of our thinking: first, that we
issue central bank money, in the form of claims on the Bank of England; and second, that in
doing so we must meet the public’s demand for our notes. By issuing central-bank money,
we are providing both a means of payment and a store of value.
But I think we should recognise that the paradox of banknotes that I have described indicates
that there may well be a limit to the growth of the value of notes in circulation insofar as the
use of banknotes as a means of payment is not increasing. This is, though, a broad
assessment, and I would not wish to offer a judgment on the level at which the demand of
the public to hold more banknotes will peak. An important reason for this uncertainty is that,
as recent experience indicates, the demand for banknotes as a store of value is dependent
on the state of the economy and the financial system. This is a challenge for central banks
because we have to manage our own contingency stocks based on a view of likely future
demand. This is something to which central banks have had to devote more attention over
the last two years.
What does it mean to meet the public’s demand for banknotes
I want to turn now to considering what it means to meet the public’s demand for our
banknotes. I take this very seriously, with the principle that the public knows best what it
wants in terms of what it requires from its banknotes.
I think it is reasonable to say that, in the past, meeting the public’s demand for notes was for
most part focused on ensuring that the value of notes demanded was available. At the Bank
of England we have outsourced much of our role in note distribution for 27 years and our
note distribution schemes have been designed around the objective of meeting public
demand for a value of notes. There is nothing at all wrong with this objective; indeed, it is the
heart of what we do on note distribution. But increasingly, we are trying to meet two other
objectives as well: maintaining a satisfactory physical quality of our notes in circulation, and
meeting the public’s demand for different denominations, ie the denominational mix.
There are two developments which stand out for me in terms of the physical quality of notes.
First, modern ATMs can more safely dispense notes of a physical quality that as the issuing
authority I would not wish to see in circulation (for example, heavily soiled notes). This is a
mundane point, but the latest ATMs are harder to jam, unlike their predecessors. On the
whole, financial institutions do not dispense what we regard as unfit notes, even though their
ATMs might be able to do so, but as the issuing authority we now have to pay more attention
to ensuring that this does not happen. The second development represents the connection
between the physical quality of notes and denominational mix. We have most difficulty
getting our low denomination note, the £5, into circulation. The main reason for this problem
is that few ATMs dispense £5s. The link to quality comes about because once our £5s enter
circulation, they stay in circulation and exchange hands more times before they return into
the wholesale cash distribution system for fitness sorting, and thus can be taken out of
circulation as unfit or re-circulated as a fit note. Put simply, since there are relatively few £5
notes entering circulation they stay in circulation and are not banked and fitness sorted as
regularly as they should be. Chart 9 illustrates this problem. It shows over the last nearly
fifteen years the trend in how many times per year on average banknotes of each
denomination are processed through the wholesale cash centre fitness sorting process. The
intuition we think is that the lowest value note should be sorted most often, and the highest
value note least often. The reason for this order is that the lowest value note will be nearest
to a pure transactional instrument, and the highest value note nearest to a pure store of

BIS Review 162/2009

7

value instrument. As the chart indicates, the intuition holds for all denominations except the
£5. On average, at £10 note passes through a cash centre for sorting nine times a year, a
£20 four and a half times, and a £50 just under once a year. But the £5 has seen a decline
from five times a year in the mid-1990s to one and a half times a year now. This goes a long
way to explain the problem we have with the £5. We need to see more dispensed so that
they are less scarce and therefore they return to cash centres for sorting more often.

In the last few years we have had some success in increasing the total number of £5s in
circulation. The overall value of £5s in circulation had been stuck at around £1bn since the
early 1990s. In the last two years it has risen to £1.3bn. But the evidence from turnover
indicates that we have a lot more to do. Recently, we have therefore run two pilot schemes.
One is with a major bank, which has agreed to stock a proportion of its ATMs with £5s and
examine what affect this change would have on its cash business. The results to date
suggest that the business case for stocking some ATMs with £5s is stronger than previously
thought.
At the same time, we have carried out a second pilot study. This has been focused on the
business case for major retailers ordering more £5s to use as change. A major supermarket
chain has conducted a trial which involves supplying more £5s to many of its stores. Again,
the results appear to have been a success. Using more £5s as change has appeared to
slightly speed up the overall processing of payments at the checkout and appears to be well
received by customers.
I am very grateful to HSBC and Sainsbury’s for their help with these two pilots. In the New
Year I hope and expect that we will take these examples to other financial institutions and
major retailers to make the case for a change of policy towards issuing £5s. This is important
because my assessment is that there is a good deal of aversion among the commercial
sector to change in this area. Yet our evidence suggests that the public wants more of them
and of a better quality. To achieve that objective we need to see more £5s dispensed from
ATMs and by retailers in change. With the results of these two pilot exercises, I think we
have the evidence to press the case for raising the dispense of £5s, and we will do this
alongside reviewing our distribution scheme to ensure that the incentives for note distribution
are properly aligned across the denominations.

8

BIS Review 162/2009

The story of the £5 illustrates the growing importance of denominational mix in our note
distribution policy. We want to work with the commercial sector to ensure that the public’s
demand for a balanced denominational mix of notes is met.
In conclusion, notes are a big business for central banks. They are high profile in the eye of
the public. There is an apparent paradox in that the value of notes in circulation has been
rising year after year at the same time that evidence suggests that the use of notes to pay for
transactions is declining. I have offered some explanations for this paradox which highlight
that banknotes are also a store of value since they are central bank money. But at the same
time the objectives of our central bank distribution scheme have grown in number to embrace
the physical quality of notes in circulation and the denominational mix. The last of these –
denominational mix – poses the biggest challenge, but in the UK I believe we now have
evidence to support the business case for ATM and retailer dispense of £5s.
And, finally, I am sometimes asked why this matters to the Bank of England? After all, I can
assure you that in the current financial conditions we are not short of difficult challenges. The
answer is simple. We should not forget that our job is to ensure that confidence in our
currency is maintained – and crucial to that is satisfying the public’s demand for our notes.

BIS Review 162/2009

9

