Timothy F Geithner: Developments in the global economy and implications for
the United States
Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Council on Foreign Relations' C Peter McColough Roundtable Series on
International Economics, New York, 11 January 2007.
*

*

*

It is a pleasure to be here at the Council on Foreign Relations, and to be here with Jerry Corrigan.
A few brief remarks about the global economy, both the real and financial dimensions, to provide a
basis for our discussion.
2006 marked the fourth successive year of a global expansion that has been remarkable for its
strength, for its breadth, and for its stability in the face of economic shocks and uncertainty in the
geopolitical realm.
This period of broad-based growth in income has been supported by a number of important
fundamental forces.
Rapid technological innovation and greater economic integration have brought stronger growth and
higher levels of productivity. The acceleration in productivity growth that occurred in the United States
in the second half of the last decade seems likely to remain intact. And productivity growth is
accelerating outside the United States, most strikingly in some of the large emerging economies.
Financial innovation and greater integration of national financial systems has contributed to the
strength of real economic activity by improving the allocation of resources within and among
economies. Improvements to risk management and to capital cushions are likely to have made the
financial system more stable and more resilient.
And macroeconomic policy has improved around the world. The increase in monetary policy credibility
in a broad range of countries has produced lower rates of inflation and more stability in inflation
expectations. Greater public confidence in monetary policy was critical to laying the foundation for the
improvements in real economic performance, by providing a stable foundation for long-term
investment decisions.
In emerging markets, better monetary policy has been accompanied by more disciplined and
conservative fiscal policy and a range of other policies that have reduced, though not eliminated,
vulnerability to changes in confidence, capital flows and exchange rate movements.
These factors are each fundamentally important, and they are, of course, interrelated. The policies that
delivered better inflation outcomes, more openness and competition and stronger financial systems
were critical to fostering an environment in which improvements in productivity and growth could
occur.
This expansion has also been notable for the financial conditions that have prevailed over the past
several years.
Long-term interest rates have remained relatively low in nominal and real terms. Equity and other
asset prices have moved higher. Credit spreads have declined to quite low levels. Market participants
report exceptionally high levels of liquidity. And volatility, both realized and expected, has remained
low across many different types of financial assets, market and economies.
This general constellation of market conditions and asset prices is unusual, at least in comparison to
what we have seen over the past several decades. This has been a distinguishing feature of the
present expansion, but it is not something we fully understand, and we cannot be confident in
judgments about how durable it will prove to be.
To a significant extent, these financial developments reflect a high degree of confidence in future
macroeconomic and financial stability, reinforced by the improvements in inflation performance, growth
outcomes and financial resilience of the past several years.
Better monetary policy has lowered expectations of future inflation and inflation volatility and has
contributed to lower risk premiums in general. Changes in the cyclical behavior of financial

BIS Review 2/2007

1

intermediation and credit provision, coupled with the increased stability of the real economy, seem
likely to have reinforced the improvements on the monetary policy front.
And rapid growth in the major emerging market economies, together with the substantial earnings of
energy-producing and commodity-exporting countries, have produced a substantial increase in wealth
and savings relative to perceived investment opportunities. In a world where capital can now flow
much more freely across national borders, a significant portion of these savings has moved across
national borders.
These are powerful and fundamental forces, and they certainly help explain the broad reduction in risk
premiums and the substantial demand for credit risk and financial assets.
There are other factors at work as well, however, that have less favorable implications. Part of this
recent dynamic in financial markets is a consequence of the present state of the international
monetary system, in which a substantial part of the world economy runs exchange rate regimes tied in
some way to the dollar. This has entailed a sustained period of very substantial official accumulation of
dollar reserves, putting downward pressure on U.S. interest rates and upward pressure on U.S. asset
prices.
These forces are surely transitory, but their impact on capital flows, interest rates and asset prices are
important, not just in terms of their short-term impact on growth. If they are large enough, they have
the potential to alter or distort current decisions about investment and consumption in a way that could
be detrimental to our longer-run growth prospects. And they are important because they work to mask
or dampen the effects on risk premiums in financial markets that we might otherwise expect to be
associated with the expected trajectory of the fiscal and external imbalances in the United States.
Given this broad context, I want to touch briefly on some of the policy issues that are likely to be
important to the prospects for economic performance, here and around the world. Despite the
relatively favorable performance of the global economy, we face a range of daunting longer-term
economic policy challenges. The improvements in the conduct of monetary policy were critical to the
improvements in productivity and growth that we are now seeing on a global scale. And monetary
policy will, of course, continue to be critical, but monetary policy alone cannot provide the elements of
the framework necessary to provide an environment for innovation and long-term decisions that will be
so vital for future growth. Economic policy, in general, needs to be more forward looking in providing a
longer-term framework for stability.
On the fiscal policy front, demographic changes confront governments around the world with
exceptionally difficult choices. For the United States, these challenges are less acute than for many of
the major economies, but they are still formidable in their scale and complexity. Even for the near term
- for the period before the increase in number of retirees starts to have a major impact on Social
Security and Medicare expenditures - we are running an unsustainably large fiscal deficit. Despite the
recent improvements in revenues, the expected trajectory for the fiscal deficit will mean that federal
government debt will continue to rise as a share of GDP. The restoration of fiscal rules - such as those
that require new tax cuts or expenditure programs to be funded with offsetting policy measures - will
help reduce the risk of further deterioration. However, they need to be complemented by a consensus
on policy changes that will produce smaller future deficits.
Restoring confidence in U.S. fiscal management would be important and necessary independent of
the broader context of the global economy today, but it is more important given the size of our external
imbalance, now running at the unprecedented level of 7 percent of GDP a year. The trade balance in
real terms has been broadly stable over the past two years, but our net income payments have shifted
to deficit, and the size of that component of the current account deficit seems likely to continue to
expand. These large global imbalances, our current account deficit and the surpluses that are the
counterpart to our deficit, will have to come down over time. How that process unfolds will depend on a
complex mix of factors around the world. Confidence that the U.S. political system will act to generate
a sustainable fiscal trajectory is important to raising the probability that this process of adjustment
unfolds with less risk.
A successful conclusion of the Doha round of trade negotiations would provide some insurance
against the risk that the process of economic integration will be interrupted or reversed. Despite the
relatively favorable average income gains of the past few years, a common feature of the political
context in economies around the world is the fragility or weakness of public support for openness and
economic integration.

2

BIS Review 2/2007

The political challenge of sustaining support for the process of integration may be the most important
economic challenge of our time. To paraphrase Lawrence Summers, it is not enough to explain that
globalization is inevitable and that policies that look politically attractive as a response to economic
anxiety will only hurt the economy as a whole. Nor is it a politically effective strategy to state simply
that economic integration is a necessary and powerful force in raising average incomes, or that
technological change may be more important than trade or immigration as an explanation for slower
growth in real wages for many Americans.
Raising the quality of education and exploring ways to improve the safety net are a necessary part of
the solution to this challenge. But these reforms will have a long fuse and they may not yield the
hoped-for increase in support. Trade does not appear to be more popular in countries with more
generous safety nets, universal health care and highly subsidized higher education than it is today in
the United States.
The political challenges of sustaining support for global economic integration and fiscal sustainability
will be more difficult in the United States because of what has happened to the distribution of income
and economic insecurity. Several broad economic forces substantially complicate an already difficult
set of political challenges: the long-term increase in income inequality, the slow pace of growth in real
wages for the middle quintiles of the population, the increase in the volatility of income that is a
reflection of the greater flexibility of the U.S. economy, and the greater exposure of households to the
risk in financing retirement and the burden of paying for health care.
More generally, the global financial system and the monetary arrangements that underpin it are in the
process of a delicate and consequential transition as the major emerging market economies particularly in Asia - move toward more mature monetary policy frameworks, more flexible exchange
rate regimes and more open capital markets. This transition will require careful management, and the
economic dimensions of getting it right would be complicated even without the political pressures
those governments face.
One final note on the financial system. The global financial system is in the process of very dramatic
change. The changes of even just the last five years are extraordinary, in terms of the size, and
strength, and scope of the major global firms, the role of private leveraged funds, the extent of risk
transfer and the increase in the size of the derivatives market, the change in the structure of the credit
market, the increase in and changes in the pattern of cross border financial flows.
These changes, and others, seem likely to have made the financial system both more effective in
moving capital to its most productive use and more stable and resilient over time. But they do not, of
course, mean the end of systemic risk in financial markets. They could in some circumstances work to
magnify rather than mitigate stress. Central banks, supervisors and those running the major private
financial institutions need to continue to work to ensure that what Jerry Corrigan calls the “shock
absorbers” in the financial system - capital and liquidity and the operational infrastructure - are
sufficiently strong and robust to withstand economic and financial conditions more adverse than we
have seen in the recent past.
Thank you.

BIS Review 2/2007

3

Timothy F Geithner: Liquidity and financial markets
Keynote address by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 8th Annual Risk Convention and Exhibition, Global Association of
Risk Professionals, New York, 28 February 2007.
*

*

*

We have been in a period that market participants have characterized as one of exceptional liquidity.
This is both a reflection of, and has contributed to, the ongoing expansion in the world economy. I
want to focus my remarks today on the role of liquidity in markets, and what supervisors and market
participants can do to make markets more robust against the shocks that we know will occur from time
to time. These remarks are directed to a general phenomenon related to developments in the financial
markets in recent years, and not to the specific conditions of the moment.
Liquidity plays a central role in the functioning of financial markets. Structural changes in the financial
system that have been underway for some time increase the importance of market liquidity. The
allocation of capital increasingly relies on securities markets, where funds for investment in the real
economy are raised through the direct issuance of securities to investors. A greater diversity of
financial institutions, institutions other than banks, now play a more active role in the provision of credit
and liquidity.
Liquidity can mean many different things. One dimension of liquidity is the availability of credit or the
ease with which institutions can borrow or take on leverage. This is generally referred to as funding
liquidity.
Another dimension of liquidity is the ease with which market participants can transact, or the ability of
markets to absorb large purchases or sales without much effect on prices. This is what is generally
called market liquidity.
Although these two concepts are distinct, they are closely related and are often mutually reinforcing.
Fundamentally this is so because when funding liquidity is abundant traders have the resources with
which to finance trading positions that smooth price shocks and make markets liquid.
In practice, this mutually reinforcing behavior is driven by a complex array of factors, including the
degree of leverage embedded in the markets at any given time, the difficulty that lenders face in
discerning whether a surge in volatility is driven by a transitory shock of some kind or a permanent
shock to fundamentals, and risk management practices.
Institutions manage the credit risk in their trading-related exposure by requiring some counterparties to
post collateral or margin. Typically, institutions require of hedge fund counterparties both initial margin
against potential loss and variation margin, which requires payment to cover any decline in the value
of the position. If the position declines in value, the counterparty will have to meet margin calls. If it
does not have enough liquidity on hand to meet those calls, it will have to liquidate other positions to
raise the requisite cash. The failure to satisfy such a margin call could lead to the liquidation of the
position.
This approach to risk management can transform credit risk into liquidity risk. In most circumstances,
the impact of this is unexceptional. Other institutions will find the new prices attractive and step in and
buy. In exceptional circumstances, however, as creditors and counterparties seek to reduce their
exposure to future losses, actions intended to limit individual exposure to risk may instead increase
overall risk.
We do not know very much about what makes markets more or less vulnerable to this type of acute
shock. This is in part because liquidity itself is not easy to measure.
A broad range of indicators tells us something about funding liquidity, including growth in monetary
aggregates, in financial assets and different forms of borrowing or credit. Other measures, such as
movements in bid-ask spreads, the level of interest rates, changes in asset prices and risk premia,
along with the level of volatility and expectations of future volatility, and turnover volume or other
measures of market depth, help us evaluate market liquidity.
Yet none of the measures provides a reliable way of judging how vulnerable markets are to a reversal,
or the scale of damage that might accompany a reversal.

BIS Review 19/2007

1

These measurement limitations are similar to those that make it difficult to judge when, and by what
magnitude, asset prices deviate from fundamental values at any given point in time.
In the case of liquidity, the shortcomings of our analytical tools are magnified by the difficulty of
measuring leverage or identifying potential concentrations in the financial system. This has always
been challenging, but the growth in the overall size of private pools of capital and the degree of
embedded leverage that exists in many derivative instruments makes this more challenging today.
When market liquidity and funding seem abundant, this is likely to be observable in things we can
measure, like interest rates and credit spreads. And when liquidity ebbs, the effect is conspicuous in a
range of observable market prices and volumes. But we do not have, and probably never will have, a
set of indicators that offers the promise of predicting when liquidity conditions will reverse, or when
markets are particularly vulnerable to a more acute decline in liquidity.
In this sense, liquidity is like confidence. And, like confidence, liquidity plays a critical role both in
establishing the conditions than can lead to a financial shock, and in determining whether that shock
becomes acute, threatening broader damage to the functioning of financial and credit markets.
What role can policy play in reducing the vulnerability of markets to this type of dynamic?
Of course, central banks have a range of instruments they can use in the event of a crisis. By injecting
liquidity into the system, and thus strengthening confidence, they can reduce the risk that temporary
liquidity problems will result in default by otherwise solvent institutions, or damage to the payment
system or credit process.
But what can policy makers do ex ante to limit the risk of crisis? The most powerful instruments we
have are those that affect the strength of the basic, fundamental shock absorbers in the financial
system. When capital and liquidity cushions at the major institutions are strong, then markets as a
whole are less vulnerable to the adverse spiral of asset price declines, increased volatility, and
declining liquidity. And when the operational infrastructure is robust, markets will be able to absorb
larger shocks and sharper changes in risk appetite with less risk of broader contagion. These shock
absorbers are substantially stronger today than they have been in even in the relatively recent past.
These issues are the principal focus of day-to-day supervision and market oversight in the major
financial centers around the world. The Federal Reserve is actively involved in a range of efforts,
working closely with the primary supervisors of the major global financial institutions and the critical
parts of the financial infrastructure, to encourage further progress.
In this context, we are working to put in place a stronger regulatory capital regime and to strengthen
the capacity of firms to absorb losses in stress conditions. We are encouraging more sophisticated
and more conservative management of credit exposures in over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives and
structured financial products, as well as of exposures to hedge funds. And we are encouraging a
range of efforts to modernize the operational infrastructure that underpins the OTC derivatives
markets, and to improve the capacity of market participants to manage adversity.
These efforts will all contribute to a more resilient system, one that is better able to withstand the
effects of a major decline in asset prices or deterioration in credit.
Are there other tools that policy makers and market participants could use to address this risk?
Some policy makers have argued that public disclosure of information could help reduce the risk of
future systemic financial crisis, by preventing the buildup of "excessive" leverage or concentrations of
risk.
The principal focus of attention, as in the immediate wake of the failure of Long Term Capital
Management, has been on two quite different types of public disclosure.
The first is information that would make it easier to evaluate the overall leverage or risk profile of major
hedge funds and their counterparties, and thereby judge their vulnerability to a sharp movement in
asset prices. The second is information about the actual positions of individual funds or institutions:
information that would make it easier to identify concentrated exposures to specific risk factors, and
thereby assess more accurately the potential impact of the failure of a major fund or institutions on the
market as a whole.
These pose very different challenges and offer different benefits. There are a number of crude
measures of overall risk profile that, if disclosed to the market, would give counterparties information
they do not now typically get about the risk of failure of the fund. One example is data on the size of

2

BIS Review 19/2007

daily variations in net asset value, VAR, or profit and loss over the previous quarter. This type of
information would not reveal proprietary information about trading strategies or otherwise create
substantial disincentives to risk taking. Although these would provide some information on the overall
risk profile of the fund, they would be lagging indicators, and they would carry the usual risk of
providing false comfort in some circumstances and excessive concern in others.
Adopting such measures would give the institutions that provide financing and leverage to hedge
funds a somewhat greater capacity to judge their direct risk to those funds. But that is not their
principal challenge. The institutions already know the positions they are financing, and they can use
the usual range of tools to measure the potential exposure, net of collateral, in those positions. And
where they do not feel they have adequate information to evaluate the overall risk profile of the fund,
they can manage that risk by taking less exposure, by requiring more margin, or by building a greater
cushion of protection against overall risk. So the potential gains from a disclosure regime of this type
would be limited, at least as compared with the cost of trying to put such a regime in place on the
global scale that would be necessary to make it effective.
By far the greater challenge is to assess the potential impact of the failure of a major hedge fund on
the firm's other exposures and other counterparties. This is a question about how correlated the firms
other positions are to the risks the hedge fund is taking. It goes beyond the firm's direct credit
exposure to the hedge fund, to the fund's overall risk profile. Large hedge funds typically use multiple
prime brokers, and they are, of course, reluctant to disclose to those institutions real time information
on their overall positions and trading strategies. So the banks and investment banks do not generally
know what their overall exposure to credit and market risks might be in the event that a large fund is
forced to liquidate positions.
This knowledge gap has led many to advocate the provision of information on actual positions of the
major funds, perhaps aggregated by a third party. According to the proponents, this would help market
participants and regulators to identify potential concentrations or crowded trades, and that knowledge
would help diffuse them before they became a problem.
This type of transparency has understandable and enduring appeal, but it is unachievable. There is no
feasible way to try to capture in real time the rapidly changing exposures of different institutions to
different risks in any meaningful fashion. No one with access to that information could make sensible
judgments about the level and nature of actual concentrations and whether the risks are excessive.
We continue to explore ways in which the provision of greater information to counterparties and to the
markets more generally could help reduce vulnerability to financial crises. For now, though, the
practical limitations on achieving greater transparency underscore the importance strengthening the
robustness of the shock absorbers in the financial system. We are not likely to ever be in a position
where we have the capacity to identify the source and estimate the probability of future financial
shocks. And policy makers are unlikely to ever be in a position to diffuse concentrations of risk or
crowded trades ahead of a crisis. The most sensible thing we can do is to improve the capacity of the
core of the financial system to handle adversity, and this requires continued focus on improving the
strength of the capital and liquidity cushions, as well as the market infrastructure.
Let me end with a few quick thoughts on the role of monetary policy in this context. Can monetary
policy play a pre-emptive role in reducing the vulnerability of financial markets to the type of dynamic
we saw in 1987 and 1998?
Central banks cannot realistically hold out the prospect of using monetary policy to prevent asset price
bubbles, conditions of "excess" leverage in parts of the financial system, or other factors in markets
that might lead to the types of positive feedback dynamics that were at the heart of some past crises.
And yet many of the observations made about liquidity and market conditions over recent years have
potential implications for monetary policy. Changes in risk premia, the level of asset prices, credit
spreads, and interest rates, and in realized and expected volatility of asset prices – these can all affect
the pace at which overall demand grows, and can therefore potentially affect future inflation.
In discharging their responsibilities for the maintenance of price stability, central bankers need to be
eclectic in looking at a range of different ways of measuring the stance of monetary policy, and its
effects on the future path of growth and inflation. No indicators of liquidity or overall financial conditions
provide a ready guide to judgments about monetary policy. But all these indicators merit careful
attention, and they strengthen the argument against narrow or mechanistic approaches to thinking
about the monetary and broader economic outlook.

BIS Review 19/2007

3

Ultimately, though, ex ante judgments about leverage, concentrations and liquidity risk will continue to
prove elusive. Our principal focus should therefore be not in the search for the capacity to
preemptively diffuse conditions of excess leverage or liquidity, but in improving the capacity of the core
of the financial system to withstand shocks and on mitigating the impact of those shocks. And, as
always, central banks need to stand prepared to make appropriate monetary policy adjustments if
changes in financial conditions would otherwise threaten the achievement of the goals of price stability
and sustainable economic growth.
Thank you.

4

BIS Review 19/2007

Timothy F Geithner: Credit markets innovations and their implications
Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the 2007 Credit Markets Symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, Charlotte, North Carolina, 23 March 2007.
*

*

*

I am grateful to Jeff Lacker for including me in this conference, and my compliments to him and the
Richmond Fed for bringing together an excellent group to discuss the implications of recent
innovations in credit markets.
The past few years have seen remarkable changes in credit markets, and this is a good time to take
stock of what we know about those developments and their implications.
The latest wave of credit market innovations has elicited some concerns about their implications for
the stability of the financial system, concerns similar to those associated with earlier periods of rapid
change in financial markets. Will the most recent credit market innovations amplify credit cycles,
contributing to "excessive" lending in times of relative stability, and then magnify the contraction in
credit that follows? Will they introduce greater volatility in financial markets? Will they create greater
risk of systemic financial crisis?
These concerns have been heightened in some quarters by the problems currently being experienced
in the subprime mortgage sector. It will take some time before the full implications are understood and
the full impact can be assessed. As of now, though, there are few signs that the disruptions in this one
sector of the credit markets will have a lasting impact on credit markets as a whole.
Indeed, economic theory and recent practical experience offer some reassurance against both these
specific concerns and more general worries about the implications of credit market innovations for the
performance of the financial system.
The rapid growth in these new types of credit instruments is, of course, a sign of their value to market
participants. For borrowers, credit market innovation offers the prospect of increased credit supply;
better pricing; and a relaxation of financial constraints. For investors, new credit instruments bring the
prospect of broader risk and return opportunities; the ability to diversify portfolios; and increased
flexibility. And for lenders, innovations can help free up funding and capital for other uses; they can
help improve credit risk and asset/liability management; and they can improve the return on capital
and provide new and cheaper funding sources.
By spreading risk more broadly, providing opportunities to manage and hedge risk, and making it
possible to trade and price credit risk, credit market innovation should help make markets both more
efficient and more resilient. They should help make markets better able to allocate capital to its highest
return and better able to absorb stress. Broad, deep and well-functioning capital markets
complemented by strong, well-capitalized banks, able to provide liquidity in times of strain, make for a
more efficient financial system: one which contributes to better economic growth outcomes over time.
There are therefore compelling arguments in favor of a generally positive assessment of the
consequences of innovation. Does experience provide support for these arguments, or are these
changes too new for us to know?
The recent changes in credit markets have been dramatic. We have seen rapid growth of structured
credit products, credit default swaps and new types of collateralized debt and loan obligations.
Although these instruments are very new, they are the natural extension of earlier innovations in credit
markets. Over a long period we have seen innovations ranging from the syndication of bank loans and
the direct provision of credit through the capital markets, to the spread of asset-backed securities and
products that separate different parts of the payments stream and different dimensions of the risk in a
credit obligation into different instruments.
These changes have contributed to a substantial reduction in the share of total credit held by banks.
They have produced a greater separation or distance between the entity that first arranges a loan and
those who end up holding the risk, and more intermediaries in that chain. And they have contributed to
a dramatic increase in the number and diversity of creditors to any individual borrower, and a greater
capacity to actively trade credit risk.

BIS Review 29/2007

1

We are now well into the third decade of experience with the consequences of these earlier
innovations, and this history offers some useful lessons for evaluating the probable impact of the latest
changes in credit markets.
The ease with which the U.S. financial system absorbed the substantial scale of corporate defaults
that peaked in recent years in 2002 provides some support for the argument that broader and deeper
capital markets make the system more resilient.
In general, there does not seem to be strong empirical support for the proposition that derivatives
increase volatility in financial markets. Volatility is not higher where derivatives are most prevalent.
Credit market innovation does not appear to have resulted in a large increase in leverage in the
corporate sector, as some had feared. Indeed, nonfinancial corporate leverage in the United States is
currently low by recent historical standards. The overall degree of balance sheet leverage by
corporations, for example, is higher in some more traditional financial systems than it is in systems
where credit market innovations are more advanced.
Default rates do not appear to have risen, nor recovery rates fallen as these credit innovations have
spread, despite concerns they might lead to excess lending, the mis-pricing of credit risk and more
messy and more complicated workouts, resulting from the greater diffusion of the investor base.
And although the sources of the broad moderation in GDP volatility observed in the United States over
the past two decades are still the subject of debate, the fact that this moderation occurred during a
period of extensive innovation in credit and other financial markets should provide some comfort for
those who expected the opposite.
Innovations in credit markets are inevitably accompanied by challenges. Indeed, the history of
innovation in financial markets provides many examples of periods of rapid change accompanied by
fraud and abuse, by challenges in assessing value and risk, by concerns about the adequacy of
investor and consumer protection, and by unexpected behavior of prices, defaults and correlations. To
some degree, these types of problems are the inevitable consequence of change and innovation.
Although recent experience as well as theory provide some reassurance against the concern that
credit market innovation would make markets more volatile and the financial system more vulnerable,
these judgments require qualification. Some aspects of this latest wave of innovation are different in
substance – therefore potentially in their implications – from their predecessors. And these differences
require attention.
There are three aspects of the latest set of changes which I think deserve more reflection.
The first is about the role of market liquidity and liquidity risk in how credit markets work. Credit market
innovations have transformed the financial system from one in which most credit risk is in the form of
loans, held to maturity on the balance sheets of banks, to a system in which most credit risk now takes
an incredibly diverse array of different forms, much of it held by nonbank financial institutions that mark
to market and can take on substantial leverage.
U.S. financial institutions now hold only around 15 percent of total credit outstanding by the nonfarm
nonfinancial sector: that is less than half the level of two decades ago. For the largest U.S. banks,
credit exposures in over-the-counter derivatives is approaching the level of more traditional forms of
credit exposure. Hedge funds, according to one recent survey, account for 58 percent of the volume in
credit derivatives in the year to the first quarter of 2006.
Financial shocks take many forms. Some, such as in 1987 and 1998, involve a sharp increase in risk
premia that precipitate a fall in asset prices and that in turn leads to what economists and engineers
call "positive feedback" dynamics. As firms and investors move to hedge against future losses and to
raise money to meet margin calls, the brake becomes the accelerator: markets come under additional
pressure, pushing asset prices lower. Volatility increases. Liquidity in markets for more risky assets
falls.
In systems where credit is more market-based and more credit risk is in leveraged financial institutions
outside the banking system, a sharp rise in asset-price volatility and the concomitant reduction in
market liquidity, can potentially have greater negative effects on credit markets. If losses in these
institutions force them to withdraw from credit markets, credit availability will decline, unless or until
other institutions in a stronger financial position are willing to step in. The greater connection between
asset-price volatility, market liquidity and the credit mechanism is the necessary consequence of a
system in which credit risk is dispersed outside the banking system, including among leveraged funds.

2

BIS Review 29/2007

This does not make the system less stable, though, only different. For if risk is spread more broadly,
shocks should be absorbed with less trauma. Moreover, the system as a whole may be less
vulnerable to distortions introduced by the moral hazard associated with the access that banks have to
the safety net.
A second issue we need to consider stems from the complexity of the new credit instruments, the
challenges they present in terms of valuation and risk measurement and their short history of
experience in times of stress.
Even the most sophisticated participants in the markets for these instruments find the risk
management challenges associated with these instruments daunting. This raises the prospect of
unanticipated losses. Default rates are harder to predict where there has been a substantial change in
the financial attributes of borrowers. The prices of instruments may not respond as expected to a given
change in losses or in the value of the assets underlying these instruments. Hedging strategies may
prove to be less effective than expected. Similarly rated instruments can behave very differently in
stress events.
The response of prices and volatility to the downgrades in the automobile sector in the spring of 2005
and the recent experience in subprime mortgages and related asset-backed securities and credit
derivatives illustrate different types of surprises faced by the participants in these markets. They are a
reminder of the dimensions of uncertainty that exist about the shape of the distribution of potential
returns. This is particularly true of what we might call the adverse tail, or the negative extreme. These
challenges exist for all participants in these markets: for the institutions that underwrite, structure and
distribute these risks; for those who trade or hold them; and for third parties, like the rating agencies.
These challenges of complexity are significant as well because they can exacerbate the problem of
dealing with classic principal-agent problems. You can see this in the subprime mortgage market
where, for example, a person may be rewarded for generating new mortgages on the basis of volume,
without being directly exposed to the consequences of default; but these problems exist wherever
incentives diverge and contracting is imperfect. Financial institutions typically maintain a range of
different checks and balances to deal with the risk of misaligned incentives: for example, between a
trader and the principal whose resources are at risk, or between the mortgage broker or underwriter
and the firm that ultimately ends up holding the risk. But these checks and balances depend in part on
the capacity of risk managers to observe and understand the underlying economic risk in these
instruments. Where that is harder because of this combination of complexity, imbedded leverage, and
short loss history, then market discipline will be weaker.
A third issue relates to the dynamics of failure and the infrastructure that supports these markets. The
dramatic growth in the volume of over-the-counter derivatives and the growth in the number and size
of leveraged funds inevitably complicate the resolution of the failure of a large financial institution that
is active in these markets. The sheer number of financial contracts that would have to be unraveled in
the context of a default, the challenge that a former colleague of mine likes to refer to as
"unscrambling the eggs," could exacerbate and prolong uncertainty, and complicate the process of
resolution.
As is typical during periods of rapid innovation, these markets grew much more quickly than did the
supporting infrastructure. Take credit derivatives, for example. For most of the early years of this
market, much of the post-trade processing system was not automated and required substantial
manual intervention. Positions were assigned without the knowledge of counterparties. Confirmations
backlogs rose to very high levels. As Alan Greenspan put it, the market was using 19th century
methods of dealing with 21st century financial instruments.
This created a greater risk of operational problems and uncertainty about exposures in the event of
stress. The capacity of market participants to mitigate these risks by improving the infrastructure was
hampered by classic collective action problems, magnified by the greater number and diversity of
participants.
All these challenges merit attention. They describe some of the risks that have accompanied the
substantial benefits of credit market innovation. And they help illustrate why these broad changes in
financial markets may have contributed to a system where the probability of a major crisis seems likely
to be lower, but the losses associated with such a crisis may be greater or harder to mitigate.
What should policymakers to do mitigate these risks?

BIS Review 29/2007

3

We cannot turn back the clock on innovation or reverse the increase in complexity around risk
management. We do not have the capacity to monitor or control concentrations of leverage or risk
outside the banking system. We cannot identify the likely sources of future stress to the system, and
act preemptively to diffuse them.
The most productive focus of policy attention has to be on improving the shock absorbers in the core
of the financial system, in terms of capital and liquidity relative to risk and the robustness of the
infrastructure.
These issues are the principal focus of day-to-day supervision and market oversight in the major
financial centers around the world. The Federal Reserve is actively involved in a range of efforts,
working closely with the primary supervisors of the major global financial institutions and the critical
parts of the financial infrastructure, to encourage further progress. In this context, we are working to
put in place a stronger regulatory capital regime and to strengthen the capacity of firms to absorb
losses in stress conditions. We are encouraging more sophisticated and more conservative
management of credit exposures in over-the-counter derivatives and structured financial products, as
well as of exposures to hedge funds. And we are encouraging a range of efforts to modernize the
operational infrastructure that underpins the over-the-counter derivatives markets, and to improve the
capacity of market participants to manage a major default.
The stronger these shock absorbers, the more resilient markets will be in the face of future shocks,
and the more confident we can be that banks will be a source of strength and of liquidity to markets in
periods of stress and that the financial system will contribute to improved economic performance over
time.
Thank you.

4

BIS Review 29/2007

Timothy F Geithner: Reflections on the changing global economy
Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the 46th ACI Financial Markets Association World Congress, Montreal, Quebec,
4 May 2007.
*

*

*

Good morning. I am pleased to be able to join you today. And it is a privilege to be here today with
Canada's accomplished central bank governor, David Dodge. There are few people in central banks or
in governments around the world today that have presided over as far reaching and successful a set of
macroeconomic policy reforms as has David Dodge.
I want to offer some reflections about the challenges managing macroeconomic policy in a more open
and integrated world economy. And I want to say something about how the international monetary
system, and the current framework of exchange rate regimes, might develop in the coming years.
For the past century or more, choices about exchange rate regimes have played an important role in
economic outcomes across countries. From the Gold Standard of the late 19th and early 20th
centuries through the Bretton Woods system and the episodes of exchange rate cooperation among
the G5 and the G7 in the 1980s and after, the desire to achieve exchange rate stability was a major
preoccupation of policymakers. The economic damage inflicted by the disastrous competitive
devaluations among the major economies in the 1930s had a profound influence on thinking during
much of the postwar period. And for governments and enterprises around the world today, the
aversion to large fluctuations in exchange rates remains strong.
As the world has become more open to trade and more closely integrated, this sensitivity to exchange
rate variability has intensified. And yet, experience suggests that resisting variability makes the
adjustment to changing economic conditions more painful. In an increasingly open world economy, the
ability to cope with change becomes more important, and for a large fraction of the world economic,
exchange rate flexibility is a necessary condition for sustained favorable economic performance.
Changes in fundamental factors such as productivity growth and the inevitable shocks to demand and
supply require changes in relative prices, both domestically and internationally. A flexible exchange
rate regime makes it easier for relative prices to move rapidly and effectively in the appropriate
direction, and this generally eases the cost of that adjustment.
Even in a fixed rate regime, this adjustment in response to changing circumstances will ultimately have
to take place, of course. But if relative prices cannot adjust through the exchange rate, domestic
output and employment will have to bear the brunt of adjustment instead.
Since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, we have seen the emergence of a diverse range of
exchange rate arrangements. The large industrial economies have, by and large, decided to let their
currencies adjust to changing circumstances without official intervention in exchange markets. Japan
aside, it is now close to seven years since the last episode of concerted intervention among the major
economies; and there has been no Japanese intervention for two years.
Among emerging economies, too, we have seen a marked trend toward more flexible exchange rate
regimes. This is particularly pronounced in parts of Latin America. At the other end of the spectrum,
some of the newer members of the European Union are gearing up to adopt the euro. Somewhere in
the middle between these extremes of flexible exchange rate regimes and full monetary integration are
the emerging market economies, mostly in Asia and among the major oil exporters in the Gulf, that still
sustain fixed or partially fixed exchange rate regimes. Most of these countries link their currencies to
the dollar, though we see varying degrees of flexibility in the closeness of that link.
How has the world fared under this diverse mixed of flexible and fixed exchange rate regimes? In
general, I think, the costs of living with exchange rate volatility have been less than feared and
attempts to limit volatility have been more damaging and less effective than expected.
Take the experience of the major economies. Despite periods of very substantial swings in exchange
rates, and the amplitude of the changes in exchange rates among the major currencies since 1973
have been exceptionally large, economic growth in the major economies have become more stable,
not less. Quarterly GDP volatility in the United States, for example, has fallen by more than half since
the mid 1980s. And average rates of inflation and the variability of inflation outcomes have of course

BIS Review 44/2007

1

declined substantially as well. This is not to say that these swings in exchange rates have not come
with pain and trauma, only that overall economic performance has fared better than many would have
expected three decades ago when contemplating life under flexible exchange rates.
Among emerging markets, experience with exchange rate flexibility has been more limited, and the
record has been more mixed. Chile probably has one of the longest record of successful performance
under a flexible regime, success due in large part of course to a strong record of prudent
macroeconomic policy management and strong institutions. But there are many more examples today
– Brazil and Mexico are two – of emerging economies with sustained periods of improved growth and
inflation outcomes under more flexible exchange rate regimes.
Emerging market economies face substantially greater challenges than the less open major
economies in adjusting to a more integrated world and to the greater exposure to real and financial
volatility that comes with integration. Large movements in capital flows can complicate the task of
achieving sustainable growth, low inflation and financial stability. This is obvious for those countries
experiencing sharp net outflows of capital, but the challenges are formidable even for those countries
experiencing sustained periods of large inflows. And even those countries with more flexible exchange
rates can see competitiveness eroded if their major trading partners resist exchange rate appreciation.
For most countries, though, these challenges would be exacerbated rather than eased by a policy
designed to try to sustain a fixed rate or to narrowly constrain variability in the exchange rate. Although
it may seem counterintuitive, small open economies, even more than larger less open economies,
need the flexibility that floating exchange rates bring.
Changes in exchange rate regimes were present at the scene of most of the major emerging market
financial crises of the last decade, and many have argued that the decisions to let the exchange rate
adjust was a major source of the trauma that followed. But that's not a fair reading of the evidence. In
general, the crises were the consequence of fundamental economic problems, often manifested in the
buildup of substantial balance sheet problems, with excessive borrowing in foreign currency by the
sovereign, the banking system, or both.
These balance sheet problems were one reason many governments chose to postpone currency
adjustment for as long as possible, and these delays ensured that the cost of adjustment, when it was
forced on these governments, was far higher than if action had been taken earlier. But this is not the
whole story since the fixed exchange rate regime itself had contributed to the initial currency mismatch
and associated balance sheet problems. By engineering artificial expectations of stability, the regime
had led market participants to disregard the possibility of exchange rate devaluations, leading to
mispricing of risk, insufficient hedging and ultimately to misallocation of financial and real resources.
Governments that found themselves in this position had very limited ability to mitigate the economic
damage that was to come, but the policy choices that accompanied the exchange rate change often
compounded the problem.
Japan's experience provides another example, though the context was different. There is a perception
in parts of Asia that the Japanese government's decision to let the yen appreciate in the late 1980s
was principally responsible for Japan's so-called “lost decade” of low growth. And, Japan, viewed
through this prism, is cited as an example of the perils of letting an exchange rate move up in
response to changing fundamentals. The reality is more complex. The problems of the Japanese
economy in the 1990s were largely due to the aftereffects of the collapse of the real estate and asset
price boom of the preceding decade, a boom fueled in part by efforts by the monetary authorities to
limit the appreciation of the yen.
The size of the negative shock to demand from the collapse of the bubble was very substantial, and
the capacity of the government and the central bank to mitigate the damage was constrained by the
weakness in the banking system. A more forceful macroeconomic policy response, however, might
have brought about a quicker recovery. In any case, the problem with the exchange rate choice was
not the decision to let the rate adjust, but the decision to resist it and the role that played in magnifying
the bubble, and thereby the subsequent damage from the fall.
Given where we are today, and what we know about the relative merits of flexible and fixed exchange
rate regimes, what is the likely evolution of the current monetary system going forward? A few
concluding observations.
First, I think it is unlikely that we will see a substantial move toward monetary integration involving the
major emerging market economies, in Asia or in the Western Hemisphere. As the economist Peter

2

BIS Review 44/2007

Kenen writes in his latest book, it is difficult today to envisage a substantial reduction in national
currencies though the emergence of large regional monetary unions where they do not already exist.
Within Europe, we may yet see a further enlargement of the euro area. There may be other
circumstances in which individual economies can derive benefit from a currency board system or from
dollarization or euroization. Countries trying to emerge from a period of high inflation may in the future,
as they have in the past, adopt a fixed exchange rate as a nominal external anchor for a disinflation
strategy. These seem likely to be exceptions, however, to a general move toward more flexible
exchange rate regimes.
Even as regional economic integration increases in Asia and other parts of the world, these economies
seem a long way from the point where economic, or political conditions, will make a compelling case
for monetary integration. In Europe, of course, the political case for monetary integration to a large
extent preceded the economic case. And the architects of the European Union integration worked
consciously to induce a level of economic integration in Europe that would induce conditions that more
closely met the economist's test for an optimal currency area.
For most of the emerging markets today, in contrast, the challenge is to establish the conditions that
will enable them to live more comfortably in a world where their exchange rates will adjust more freely
in response to changing fundamentals. As these economies become more open to capital flows, they
will necessarily find it more difficult to occupy the tenuous middle ground with an exchange rate regime
that is neither fully fixed nor flexible, but managed in a way that closely tracks the value of the dollar or
carefully constrains fluctuations against the dollar.
This does not mean that these countries can be indifferent to exchange rate movements or that the
exchange rate is irrelevant to the conduct of monetary policy. For many small open emerging
economies, price stability and exchange rate stability are obviously intertwined, and a monetary rule
that responds effectively to inflation pressure cannot afford to overlook the signals coming from the
foreign exchange market. But attempts to target a particular level for the exchange rate or the slope of
the change in the rate in response to different conditions will, as the capital account becomes more
open, inevitably, come with substantial risks to monetary and financial stability.
Managing the transition to a more open capital account and a more flexible exchange rate regime is
not a simple task. These transitions need to be handled with care and attention to the development of
a strong institutional framework for monetary policy and the financial system. The more successful
transitions came in contexts where the monetary authorities were independent of political constraint,
where balance sheet problems and currency mismatches in the government and the financial system
were not acute, where the prevailing legal framework provided reasonable protections for property
rights and the enforcement of contract, and where there was effective supervision of the banking
system. Where these conditions were weaker, the transitions from fixed exchange rate regimes were
more traumatic.
These conditions seem exacting, and the understandable need for caution often is invoked in defense
of protracted and very gradual transitions. A certain degree of caution is wise: there is a great deal of
risk in a poorly managed and premature shift toward flexibility. But there is risk in gradualism too.
Delay magnifies the costs of living with the distortions caused by a managed rate.
Once relaxed, exchange and capital controls are both difficult and costly to reintroduce, and even
relatively modest steps back from an open regime can be damaging to confidence and credibility,
without buying much in the way of lasting stability.
The policy responses to the challenges that come with economic and financial integration principally
involve choices for governments at the national level. International cooperation can in some
circumstances help provide a more supportive environment, but there are no feasible changes to the
architecture of the international financial system that offer the prospect of a durably stable external
economic and financial environment for nations, large or small. Fundamentally, the only realistic
choice for policymakers is to equip their economies with the flexibility to cope more successfully in this
increasingly integrated global economy. And this means preparing for a world of more rather than less
flexibility in exchange rate regimes.
Thank you.

BIS Review 44/2007

3

Timothy F Geithner: Liquidity risk and the global economy
Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's 2007 Financial Markets Conference –
Credit Derivatives, Sea Island, Georgia, 15 May 2007.
*

*

*

Thank you for giving me the chance to join you today. Although this is a conference primarily about
credit derivatives, I am going to talk about some of the broader changes we are seeing in financial and
credit markets, and their implications for policy.
You are meeting during a period of remarkable change and exceptional conditions in financial
markets.
Financial markets over the past several years have been characterized by an unusual constellation of
low forward interest rates, ample liquidity, low risk premia and low expectations of future volatility. In
some markets, asset prices have risen substantially, and credit growth has expanded rapidly. In credit
markets more generally, spreads have declined to levels that reflect very low expectations of near
term losses and credit standards have weakened.
It would not be accurate to say this is a world without volatility, for we have had a series of episodes of
sharp declines in asset prices and increases in volatility. But these episodes have been contained and
short lived, with markets recovering relatively quickly and with little appreciable effect on global
economic activity.
These conditions are global in nature, though they take somewhat different forms in different markets.
The forces behind all this are complex and not well understood, and this complicates any judgment of
how enduring they will prove to be.
The main candidates in terms of fundamental explanations involve change in economic conditions and
in the structure of financial markets.
There has been a marked improvement in global economic performance, with strong growth, relatively
low inflation, and less volatility in both growth and inflation. This seems to have reduced concern about
future fundamental risk, in terms of the potential damage of future shocks and in the ability of
governments and central banks to both avoid the policy errors of the past and to competently manage
some daunting longer-term policy challenges.
The global trend toward independent central banks with clearer mandates for price stability has
contributed to this confidence, as has the improvement in national balance sheets in emerging
markets, with stronger fiscal positions, higher reserves, and less exposure to foreign-currency
denominated debt.
Changes in financial markets, including those that are the subject of your conference, have improved
the efficiency of financial intermediation and improved our confidence in the ability of markets to
absorb stress. In financial systems around the world, the capital positions of banks have improved and
capital markets are becoming deeper and playing a larger role in financial intermediation. Financial
innovation has improved the capacity to measure and manage risk. Risk is spread more broadly
across countries and institutions.
Technological change and the relaxation of controls have made it possible for capital to move more
freely across national borders. And the characteristic reluctance of savers to invest outside their home
market may be diminishing.
Alongside these longer terms trends, financial markets today also show the effects of other forces. The
extraordinary growth in earnings of energy and commodity exporters, the substantial rise in wealth that
has come with rapid growth in China, India, and other emerging markets, together with efforts by many
of those governments to stem the appreciation of their currencies, has led to a rise in capital flows,
official and private, into the United States and other major economies. These flows seem large enough
to have had a material effect on global interest rates and asset prices.
These changes in economic conditions reinforce each other. The long period of relative economic and
financial stability has reinforced expectations of future stability, reducing implied volatility and risk
premia, increasing comfort with higher leverage, and encouraging flows of capital into riskier assets.

BIS Review 49/2007

1

The low level of real interest rates that has prevailed in much of the world through this expansion has
contributed to relatively accommodative financial conditions. The high levels of reserve accumulation
by governments with heavily managed exchange rate regimes put downward pressure on forward
interest rates, potentially distorting asset prices. The increase in size of sovereign wealth funds, the
shift in assets to hedge fund and private equity managers, and the possible reduction in home bias
among private savers have increased the amount of mobile capital in search of higher returns. The
resilience of the market in the face of the latest shocks has increased confidence in future financial
resilience. In these conditions, market participants face more acutely the classic dilemma of deciding
whether to follow the market, or to buy more insurance against the risk of a reversal at the expense of
near term returns.
This mix of forces operating on financial conditions presents challenges for policymakers and financial
markets participants, for it makes it harder to figure out what is fundamental and enduring and what is
temporary or transitional, or the result of policy distortions. Confidence exists alongside concerns
about sustainability.
Although there is much that is positive in the world today, there is little reason to believe we have
entered a new era of permanent stability. Financial innovation and global financial integration do not
offer the prospect of eliminating the risk of asset price and credit cycles, of manias and panics, or of
shocks that could have systemic consequences.
Over the past 25 years or so, we have seen a significant number of episodes of financial shocks, in
U.S. markets and globally. Although more different than similar in their nature and impact, they had
some common features. They were unanticipated. The causes varied, with some associated with a
substantial deterioration in the real economy, and others not. And they typically involved the dynamic
in which a sharp change in risk perception results in a fall in asset prices and a sharp reduction in
market liquidity, and an increase in correlations across asset classes. As market participants move to
protect themselves against further losses, by selling positions, requiring more margin, hedging against
further declines, the shock is amplified and the brake becomes the accelerator.
All markets are vulnerable to this dynamic. The degree of vulnerability is not something we can
measure with any confidence, for it depends not just on the how market participants behave in the
event, but on the complex interaction of a number of different factors. The vulnerability depends, for
example, on the size of the asset price misalignment, the conditions that produced it, and the
magnitude of the shock to confidence in economic fundamentals. It depends on the scale of leverage
in the system, and the incidence of leverage or concentration of exposure to different risk factors. It
depends on the diversity of exposures or positions of different financial institutions. It depends on the
presence or absence of distortions or market failures, moral hazard being the typical problem. It
depends on perceptions of the capacity for monetary policy and other policies to adjust to mitigate the
damage.
The dramatic changes we’ve seen in the structure of financial markets over the past decade and more
seem likely to have reduced this vulnerability. The larger global financial institutions are generally
stronger in terms of capital relative to risk. Technology and innovation in financial instruments have
made it easier for institutions to manage risk. Risk is less concentrated in the banking system, where
moral hazard concerns and other classic market failures are more likely to be an issue, and spread
more broadly across a greater diversity of institutions.
And yet this overall judgment, that both financial efficiency and stability have improved, requires some
qualification. Writing a decade ago about the history of the financial shocks of the 1980s and early
1990s, Jerry Corrigan wrote that these same changes in financial markets we see today, though less
pronounced then than now, created the possibility that financial shocks would be less frequent, but in
some contexts they could be more damaging. This judgment, that systemic financial crises are less
probable, but, in the event they occur could be harder to manage, should be the principal
preoccupation of market participants and policymakers today.
What factors might contribute to this risk, a risk that could be described as the possibility of longer,
fatter tails? One reason is a consequence of consolidation. The major banks are larger and stronger
today, and it would take a much larger shock to make them vulnerable than was true in the past. But in
that event, the consequence of their failure could be greater for markets.
Another reason is the consequence of leverage. Leveraged arbitrage activity, so some of the literature
suggests, is likely to reduce volatility in normal times and increase it in times of stress, because of the
greater financial constraints faced by leveraged funds relative to larger, more diversified banks and

2

BIS Review 49/2007

investment banks. Whether this matters in a systemic sense or not depends on the heterogeneity of
funds and how correlated their exposures are with those of the major banks and investment banks.
A third reason is the consequence of long periods of low losses and low volatility. When markets have
been through a sustained period of relative stability and low credit losses, this reduces the estimates
of potential losses produced by conventional risk management tools. Like gravity, this force is hard to
counteract. And when we’ve had a long period of low realized losses, rapid change in markets,
dramatic growth in new instruments, and larger potential leverage, this creates a greater possibility of
unanticipated losses, and therefore a greater potential for the trend amplifying, positive feedback
effects that have characterized the major asset price shocks of 1987 and 1998.
Policymakers do not have the capacity to eliminate the risk of excess leverage or asset price
misalignments, nor do we have the ability to act preemptively to diffuse them. And yet policy can play
a very important role in limiting the vulnerability of financial markets to the risk that a shock will pose
greater potential risks to the stability of the financial system and to economic growth. A few points
about both monetary policy and supervision in this context.
It is now the consensus of most practicing central bankers that monetary policy can’t do much
preemptively to correct an existing substantial asset price misalignment. But if monetary policy is
calibrated appropriately to keep aggregate demand growing roughly in balance with aggregate supply
and to keep inflation low and stable, this reduces the risk that such misalignments will emerge and
expand.
This is not always easy. It is especially hard to do in circumstances where the central bank is subject
to other policy objectives. The most prominent source of conflict is an exchange rate objective;
countries with even modestly open capital accounts will not find it possible to sustain a commitment to
prevent the exchange rate from appreciating without eventually facing the risk of rising credit growth,
asset price inflation, and inflation in the price of goods and services. This challenge is becoming
harder to manage for some large emerging market economies, and it is the principal reason why in
those countries there is an expectation in the markets that monetary policy will have to be tighter and
exchange rate regimes more flexible over time. And as this happens it will, among other things, alter
the balance of forces that have been operating on global capital flows.
Beyond monetary policy, the principal tools available to policymakers are the province of supervision.
And in this area, the most important things we can to reduce the risk of systemic financial crisis are to
strengthen the shock absorbers in the financial system, both in terms of the financial cushions
available to absorb losses and the capacity of the financial infrastructure to manage stress.
In terms of the financial cushions, the challenge is to sustain a level of capital and liquidity that is large
enough to withstand a more adverse financial and economic environment than we have experience
recently. Here the job of the risk management discipline is to try to compensate for failure of
imagination, to counteract the gravitational effect on measured exposure produced by recent history,
and to try to anticipate the adverse effects on market liquidity that may come with a shock. This
requires a healthy skepticism about models, discipline and care in the face of competitive pressures,
and humility about what we can know about the future.
In the world of infrastructure, the challenge is not just about the strength of the physical infrastructure,
the capacity to handle volume, operational resilience, and vulnerability to single points of failure. Here
the challenge is about the softer infrastructure, as well, such as the arrangements for resolving a credit
event or the close out or liquidation of a complex fund or institution.
The Federal Reserve is involved in a range of important initiatives on both fronts, working closely with
the lead supervisors of the major global financial institutions and market infrastructure operators. Over
the past few years, we have initiated targeted reviews, aimed at improving the sophistication of stress
testing practice, counterparty credit risk management in OTC derivatives, structured credit, and hedge
funds, and the post trade processing infrastructure in the OTC derivatives markets. We are also
looking carefully at liquidity risk management practice and the management of the bridge exposures
institutions run in leverage lending, leveraged buyout and merger and acquisition financing, and credit
activities more generally.
These initiatives are designed with several important features: first, to bring more evenness to the
incentives faced by the major global institutions, through closer cooperation across supervisors within
the United States and across countries; second, to foster more agility in the supervisory agenda, and a
capacity to adapt to change that more closely matches the rapid evolution in market developments;
and third, to try to encourage market-led initiatives, reinforced rather than imposed by supervision. The

BIS Review 49/2007

3

careful work of Counterparty Credit Risk Management Policy Group II led by Jerry Corrigan – with the
supervisory initiatives I referred to is an example. Today, 18 global banks outlined another set of
commitments to reduce settlement risk in the equity derivatives market.
This approach to supervision is designed to look ahead to try to ensure the adequacy of capital and
liquidity, and the sophistication of risk management discipline relative to risk, over time and at all
points in the cycle. I outlined earlier the reasons why monetary policy has only limited capacity to deal
preemptively with financial bubbles. Similarly, I see little prospect that supervision will have the
capacity to identify and address potential concentrations in exposure to individual risk factors, whether
through changes to capital charges or other means. Focusing on the quality and strength of cushions
against tail risk is the best way for supervision to be countercyclical rather than procyclical.
The subtitle of your conference is, I believe, “Where’s the Risk?” And as this implies, there is still
substantial interest in markets and official circles in finding ways to use greater transparency to
improve the capacity of markets, and supervisors, to try to address emerging risks early, to let the air
out of crowded trades and concentrations of leverage or risk before they reach potentially troubling
proportions. We will continue to explore ways to improve the quality of public disclosure by financial
institutions, and other sources of information on financial activity. But we do not have the capacity to
put in place a transparency regime over markets that would give people a real-time picture of the
incidence and magnitude of potential risks. The pace of change is too rapid, the number of positions,
funds, and institutions too great, and the analytical challenge too complex to offer the promise of that
type of early warning system.
The conditions we see prevailing in global financial markets today reflect a range of different factors,
some fundamental and others that are less likely to be enduring. The most effective thing that
policymakers and market participants can do in what is a necessarily uncertain world is to work to
ensure that the shock absorbers are strong relative to the range of potential economic and financial
outcomes.
Thank you.

4

BIS Review 49/2007

Timothy F Geithner: Asia, the world economy and the international financial
system
Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Economic Society of Singapore 2007 Annual Dinner, Singapore,
13 June 2007.
*

*

*

Good evening. I am pleased to be able to join you tonight. The past decade has been one of
remarkable achievement in Asia. This is a testament to the resilience and dynamism of this region,
and yet the memories of the financial crises remain vivid and still exert a powerful influence on policy
today. Tonight, I want to reflect on what policymakers learned from the crises, to review the extent of
the progress since and to examine some of the challenges ahead.
The Asian financial crises of the late 1990s were exceptional in many respects. Described at the time
by some as the first crises of the 21st century, they were commonly regarded as without precedent
and fundamentally different from previous emerging market financial crises. Here were countries with
a remarkable record of rapid economic growth over several decades, substantial rates of investment,
with low inflation and relatively strong fiscal positions. Most conventional indicators of economic
performance and financial strength did not suggest acute underlying vulnerability.
Yet the crises erupted with remarkable speed and force. The sudden collapse of confidence led to a
sharp reversal of capital flows to the region. On the eve of the crises, net capital inflows to the Asian
crisis countries were equal to almost 6 percent of their GDP. Over the next two years, the flow of
capital more than fully reversed. Income and output contracted abruptly: in the worst affected
countries, GDP shrank by more than 10 percentage points from peak to trough and in one case, the
contraction was closer to 15 percent. By any standards, these financial crises were unusually severe.
The crises marked a sudden and dramatic break with the past, and brought a new sense of
vulnerability to economies perceived as strong and successful.
Yet though some of the characteristics of the Asian crises distinguished them from other episodes of
financial turmoil, they shared several important features in common with crises in countries with
modern, market-oriented financial systems. They were largely unanticipated. A rise in borrowing
created vulnerability to a shift in asset prices. Uncertainty about the scale and nature of the underlying
vulnerability magnified the problem. Contagion spread rapidly. Markets overshot.
The fundamental economic and financial weaknesses that were the source of vulnerability were the
consequence of the interaction between weak domestic financial systems, selective liberalization of
controls on capital flows and fixed exchange rate regimes.
Banking systems combined relatively weak supervision with broad government guarantees, some
explicit, but more commonly implicit, reflecting a tradition of public sector intervention to protect
troubled companies and banks from failure. Tax and regulatory incentives promoted short-term
borrowing in foreign currency through the banking system. Capital inflows, largely through the banking
system, helped finance a boom in investment and real estate. Distortions in the financial system led to
a misallocation of resources so that high rates of private investment did not generate substantial
improvements in productivity. Exchange rate regimes where the domestic currency was fixed to the
dollar generated false expectations of stability, and the resulting increase in unhedged borrowing
generated large exposures to changes in the exchange rate or interest rates.
By 1997, the short-term external debt of the private sector had risen substantially, relative to GDP and
to reserves, and this created conditions similar to a classic bank run, when the crises hit.
The initial spark for the loss of confidence is still not fully clear, as is often the case in financial crises.
And although the particular dynamics differed across the countries in the region, the basic pattern was
common, with a rapid and sustained effort by domestic and foreign investors to reduce their exposure
to further losses. The initial effects of this behavior made the exchange rate commitments untenable,
and when those commitments were broken and currencies fell, the panic became self-reinforcing.
Uncertainty and lack of information fed the run. Market participants were unable to judge whether
deteriorating developments reflected temporary liquidity problems or deeper solvency issues. They

BIS Review 65/2007

1

reacted by assuming the worst. These shifts in market sentiment risked becoming self-validating, with
liquidity problems transformed into solvency problems with broader risk of default.
The capacity of policymakers to restore stability was constrained by the depth of the balance sheet
problems. In some cases, where the scale of external borrowing was less acute, policymakers had
more room to act. But in most cases, policy options were very limited. Initially, governments were
reluctant to let exchange rates move too far, because of fears that this would force banks and
companies that had borrowed in dollars or yen into default on a scale that could further damage
growth. At the same time, the authorities were reluctant to tighten monetary policy as a way to help
stabilize the exchange rate because of concern it would hurt growth and perhaps exacerbate the flight
from domestic assets.
This dilemma made the initial policy response in the crisis countries look halting and tentative. And,
uncertainty about the strength and continuity of political leadership further hampered government
efforts to recover credibility. In the countries hit hardest by the crisis, looming issues of succession and
elections compounded the problem of confidence.
The crises prompted a searching reassessment of the conventional economic wisdom and a new
appreciation of the challenges that come with financial integration. The classic measures of
macroeconomic stability and policy prudence, in fiscal positions and measured inflation rates, could
mask substantial structural weaknesses, and these same structural weaknesses could ultimately
undermine the achievements of otherwise reasonably conservative macroeconomic policy
management. Partial capital account liberalization, which encouraged the accumulation of short-term
debt obligations, brought substantial risk, magnifying weaknesses in domestic financial systems.
Exchange rate commitments provided less stability than had been assumed. The rise in capital
mobility increased exposure to shifts in sentiment. Markets could now adjust much faster than policy
could typically react.
These judgments precipitated major changes in policies and a sustained investment in improvements
to the institutional framework of domestic financial systems across the region. And these changes in
turn laid the foundation for recovery and for the very substantial improvements in economic and
financial strength now evident across the region.

Achievements since the crises
Although it took some time for policy to begin to restore confidence, recovery was stronger and more
rapid than had been typical in other emerging market financial crises. Barely 18 months after the crisis,
for example, Korean GDP had returned to pre-crisis levels, and this was true for all the Asian crisis
countries by 2003. Growth has been relatively strong and stable since, though at a pace somewhat
below the unsustainable rates of the decade prior to the crises.
The balance sheets of the region have been transformed from weakness into strength. Current
account balances are generally in surplus. External debt of the banking and corporate sector has
fallen. Banking systems are now much less exposed to liabilities in foreign currencies; and the
currency mismatches that made economies so vulnerable as the crises erupted have been greatly
reduced. Official reserves have risen to levels without precedent in modern financial history.
Fiscal positions have strengthened. After rising initially with the substantial costs associated with bank
recapitalization programs, in recent years public debt ratios have generally been declining as a share
of GDP.
Monetary policy regimes have become more mature, with some progress toward greater de facto
independence for central banks, with clearer mandates for price stability.
Exchange rate regimes in the crisis countries have become somewhat more flexible, providing greater
scope for monetary policy to sustain the domestic conditions for price stability.
Financial systems are substantially stronger. Bank capital ratios now provide a significantly larger
cushion against potential losses – though capital ratios in Asian banking sectors are still generally
lower than those in other emerging economies. The quality of bank assets has improved. Nonperforming loans, estimated to have peaked at between one-quarter and three-quarters of total loans
in the crisis countries, are now under 10 percent of total loans. Financial institutions that required
government intervention have largely been restored to private ownership. Domestic capital markets

2

BIS Review 65/2007

are an increasingly important channel of intermediation in financial systems that had historically been
dominated by banks.
These are impressive achievements by any measure. And the changes that have taken place provide
a strong foundation for future growth and they make it much less likely that these economies will be
vulnerable to the type of crises of a decade ago. This progress is reflected in a broad range of financial
market indicators of risk. Risk premia in domestic interest rates markets are low. Spreads on
remaining dollar-denominated debt have fallen to levels that reflect little concern about future financial
stress.
It is important to bear in mind that some of the most dramatic changes in the performance of Asian
and other emerging market economies have taken place in an unusually benign economic
environment. The past four years have marked the strongest sustained period of growth for several
decades. Global interest rates have been relatively low. Asset prices in many markets have been
rising for a sustained period of time. Volatility in equity, interest rate and foreign exchange markets has
fallen to unusually low levels, and although we’ve seen the occasional sharp correction in some
markets, recovery has typically been quick.
These favorable conditions make everything look somewhat better than it otherwise would. But the
improvements in Asia are real, and they will make the region more resilient in the face of future
challenges.

The challenges ahead
Even with the relative prosperity of the recent past, policy in much of the region reflects substantial
ambivalence about the risks that come with financial openness. The memory of the trauma of the crisis
explains much of this ambivalence. The difficulties in managing this more recent period of substantial
capital inflows provides an additional source of unease. Policy regimes across the region are to a
significant degree directed at providing some insulation for the domestic economy from what is
considered a volatile global financial environment.
This impulse reflects itself in many different ways. It is manifested in exchange rate regimes that still
permit relatively limited variability against the dollar. It is manifested in the extent of reserve
accumulation, in part the consequence of resistance to exchange rate appreciation. And it is
manifested in the remaining controls on capital movements and the occasional experimentation with
the introduction of new controls.
The search for durable insurance against future volatility is an understandable response to the searing
experience of the crises of a decade ago. But there is risk in this as well. And the incomplete embrace
of integration could contain the seeds of future vulnerability.
In this sense, the policy agenda needs to move from a focus on creating stronger defenses against
crisis to building a greater ability to adapt to change. This requires strong institutions for the
management of macroeconomic policy so that the monetary and fiscal policies are able to respond to
shocks in a credible manner. It requires strong financial institutions with a substantial capacity to
absorb losses and cope with volatility. It requires regulatory policies that encourage competition and
innovation, with strong protections for property rights, low barriers to entry and effective financial
supervision. And it requires investments in a nation’s human capital, in education, healthcare and
pension provision. This complement of policies improves the prospects for producing the mix of
flexibility and resilience necessary for sustained growth in a more integrated world economy.
In emerging Asia, two key areas where there is the need and opportunity for further progress are in the
financial system and in the monetary policy framework.
The financial sector plays an important role in the flexibility and adaptability of economies to change, in
the resilience of economies and in the capacity of the monetary authorities to respond to adverse
shocks to asset prices or demand. Although much has been achieved in Asia over the past decade, as
the damage inflicted by the crises has been repaired, further reform will be important to the capacity of
these economies to innovate and grow and to live more comfortably with openness to capital flows.
This requires stronger banks and more developed capital markets. Thus far, we have seen more
progress on the former than the latter, but both are important and there remains considerable scope
for broadening and deepening capital markets in emerging Asia. The extent of financial innovation in
the industrial economies makes it possible for Asian countries to take advantage of huge

BIS Review 65/2007

3

improvements in the efficiency of financial intermediation. Embrace of these reforms will help ensure
that high levels of domestic savings are deployed more efficiently, that companies and financial
institutions are able to manage risks more effectively and that the financial system is more resilient in
the face of future stress.
Monetary policy regimes in much of Asia are burdened by two different types of constraints on
independence. The first relates to the institutional relationship between the central bank and the
government and the second to the multiple objectives assigned to the central banks.
All the evidence points to improved long-term inflation performance when monetary policymakers are
freed from institutional constraints that hamper their freedom of maneuver and given full operational
independence. Such independence is best achieved by enshrining it in an institutional framework that
provides for legal independence from the government, with accountability for achieving a clearly
defined mandate focused on price stability. Few Asian central banks yet enjoy full legal independence,
though most now have greater de facto independence than they once had.
Fixed, or partially fixed exchange rate regimes, of course, also constrain the independence of
monetary policy. As capital accounts become progressively more open, few countries can sustain over
time a commitment to exchange rate stability without risking price stability. Eventually central banks
will run up against limits on their capacity to sterilize the effects of exchange market intervention
designed to limit the pace and extent of appreciation of the exchange rate. Although measured
inflation in emerging Asian economies remains relatively low, the pace of credit growth and the
behavior of asset prices provide some evidence of a growing tension among competing objectives.
The longer this policy conflict persists, the greater the distortions building up in the economy, the
greater the risk of future inflation and the greater the risk of a bumpy future.
Reserves in emerging Asia recently passed the $2.5 trillion mark, double their size at the end of 2003.
Given the levels that have been reached in many countries, it may no longer be appropriate to view
rising reserves as a source of increasing strength against future volatility. They are, increasingly, signs
of the allocative distortions that result from the exchange rate regime. And they are in a sense too
much of a good thing.

Conclusion
The economic and financial transformation of the crisis economies has been extraordinary. The policy
reforms adopted in the wake of the crises have made those economies less vulnerable and more
resilient. And these changes justify substantial confidence about Asia’s economic future.
Asia’s success fundamentally changes the international economic and financial system. It is no longer
tenable to view the world as divided between a dominant core of mature industrial economies and a
smaller periphery of emerging economies. Asia is now so closely integrated with the rest of the world,
so large in relative terms, and growing so rapidly that the policy choices made in this region will have a
much greater impact on the rest of the world. And it means that Asia will need to prepare for a future in
which it relies more on the strength of growth at home rather than on the strength of growth in the rest
of the world.
As Asia makes further progress in financial reform and toward more flexible exchange rate regimes, it
will be in a better position both to deal with the inevitable challenges that come with economic and
financial integration, and to make the necessary transition to stronger domestic demand led-growth,
which will prove a more sustainable foundation for future improvements in living standards.
Thank you.

4

BIS Review 65/2007

Timothy F Geithner: Reflections on the Asian financial crises
Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Trends in Asian Financial Sectors Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, San Francisco, 20 June 2007.
*

*

*

It is a pleasure to be here at the San Francisco Fed and to join you in looking back at the Asian
financial crises. Many people in this room played critical roles in the drama of that time. We did not
always completely agree, but we usually found a way to work together on a common strategy.
The crises hit with remarkable speed and force, with substantial effects on the world economy as a
whole. The collapse in confidence led to substantial and sustained outflows of capital, forcing large
exchange rate devaluations, a sharp fall in asset prices and leaving entire banking systems virtually
insolvent. GDP fell by between 10 and 15 percent. The crises forced substantial changes in the IMF’s
instruments for crisis resolution and a major international effort to strengthen financial systems.
Even after a decade, the crises are a subject of debate and controversy. For many, they represented a
failure of financial globalization, a dramatic demonstration of the perils of openness to capital flows. A
popular perception was that economies with strong records of growth and financial management were
forced into positions of vulnerability by externally imposed programs of capital-account liberalization
and then were pushed into turmoil by an unstable, even predatory international financial system.
Adherents of this view tended to view the policy response to the crisis as harsh or inept or both.
Time has taken some of the edge off these criticisms, but they still affect the political debate in the
region today. They reflect anxieties about the balance of risks and benefits of economic and financial
integration that still play an important role in shaping economic policy, even with the substantial
progress achieved since the crises.
I want to outline some of the principal lessons of that period, both in terms of reducing vulnerability to
financial crisis and in terms of strategies for crisis resolution. I offer these with the knowledge that it is
hard for anyone who was not a finance minister or a central bank governor in the region at the time to
understand what it was like. As one of those involved in shaping the international response, I can say
that there was a lot we did not fully appreciate about the dynamics of the crises then, and that justifies
humility today in thinking about the lessons for the future.
With those qualifications, here are a few thoughts on four important issues:
•

the role of balance sheet problems in creating vulnerability to crisis,

•

the challenge in designing an appropriate exchange rate regime and monetary policy
framework for emerging market economies,

•

the conditions for dealing with progressively greater openness to capital flows, and

•

the role of policy reforms and financial assistance in crisis resolution.

Currency mismatches and balance sheet problems
In general, the crises were the consequence of fundamental economic problems, often manifested in
the buildup of substantial balance sheet problems, with excessive short-term borrowing in foreign
currency by the sovereign, the banking system, or both.
In Asia, the accumulation of short-term debt was concentrated in the banking system. Banks borrowed
dollars and yen on a large scale and then lent those funds to corporations that earned their revenues
in domestic currency. This created a mismatch between the currency denomisnation of the banks’
liabilities and their assets. And this mismatch created an acute vulnerability to exchange rate risk.
The rapid increase in foreign currency exposure was encouraged by fixed exchange rate regimes,
since these created the illusion of protection from exchange rate risk. It was encouraged by tax
incentives that favored short-term foreign currency borrowing through offshore banking centers. It was
fed by the selective liberalization of capital controls on foreign borrowing, while limitations on equity
inflows were left in place. It was exacerbated by classic moral hazard – the result of past government

BIS Review 69/2007

1

interventions to limit corporate and bank failures. And it was made worse by poor disclosure, which
masked the scale of the increase in external liabilities and the deterioration in the level of official
reserves.
The scale of the buildup of foreign currency debt was fundamental to the dynamics of the crises. Once
confidence weakened, and fixed exchange rate commitments became unsustainable, the economies
experienced a sharp reversal in capital flows as both residents and nonresidents sought to limit their
exposure to domestic institutions and assets.
This broad flight from domestic assets created conditions similar to a classic bank run. The exchange
rate decline magnified concern about potential losses in the corporate sector and banking system,
which led to a further shift in assets out of the country, which exacerbated the exchange rate decline.
These balance sheet vulnerabilities led to a vicious cycle in which the exchange rate and financial
weaknesses reinforced each other.
As economies slipped toward the edge of the cliff, policymakers were left with alarmingly few options
to try to contain the crisis and mitigate the damage inflicted on the real economy. Given that real
interest rates were already negative, relaxing monetary policy further risked accentuating the
exchange rate decline, which would, in turn, have exacerbated the problems of the banking system.
But with demand already in free fall, policymakers were equally reluctant to tighten policy and risk
further damage to growth.
Fiscal positions in Asia were far weaker than they initially appeared to be because of the enormous
contingent liabilities that governments faced as a result of the collapse of the banking systems. This
limited the room for countercyclical fiscal policy, although each government moved eventually to put in
place modest fiscal stimulus.
This diagnosis of financial vulnerabilities led to a very substantial improvement in the quality of
national balance sheets in the region. More on this later.

Exchange rate regimes and the perils of the middle
A second, and closely related lesson, relates to the exchange rate regime. In the crisis countries, the
exchange rate regime of choice had been a fixed but adjustable peg. This was softer than a currency
board – the possibility of adjustment was built into the arrangement, but it was presented as a
commitment to a fixed nominal exchange rate for an indefinite period of time.
Although these regimes of limited exchange rate flexibility had been regarded as a means of achieving
economic stability, in fact they turned out to be a source of instability. Nominal exchange rates against
the dollar had been held fixed for some time, while real effective exchange rates had appreciated
significantly. Because of weaknesses in the financial system, the investment booms of the previous
decade had not translated into increased productivity.
As investors grew concerned about potential weakness, pressure on the exchange rate further
intensified until it became unsustainable. Exchange rate intervention proved ineffective. Once
confidence had been shattered, the markets responded with brutal speed and force. Monetary
authorities without a record of institutional independence and without a sufficiently clear mandate for
price stability did not have the experience or credibility needed to restore confidence quickly.
The crises helped bring about a fundamental reassessment of the merits of fixed but adjustable
exchange rate regimes, regimes that try to exist somewhere in the middle between the opposite
extremes of irrevocably fixed and purely floating. The new consensus, which you can now see in
policy choices across emerging markets, is that the soft middle is fundamentally untenable for an
economy that is open to cross-border capital flows. With the limited exceptions of those cases where
full monetary union or a currency board is optimal, or where a fixed exchange rate can provide a
nominal anchor for a disinflation strategy, the general view now is that flexible exchange rate regimes
make more sense for emerging market economies.
Exchange rate flexibility offers the advantage of allowing monetary policy to be directed at sustaining
price stability, which in turn offers a better prospect of sustained growth. Changes in fundamental
factors such as productivity growth and inevitable shocks to demand and supply require changes in
relative prices, both domestically and internationally. A flexible exchange rate makes it easier for
relative prices to move rapidly and effectively in the appropriate direction and so generally eases the
cost of adjustment.

2

BIS Review 69/2007

Regional economic integration has increased rapidly in Asia in recent years, but these economies still
seem a long way from the point where economic or political conditions would make a compelling case
for some kind of regional monetary integration. (In Europe, of course, the political case for monetary
integration largely preceded the economic argument.) For Asian economies, as for most emerging
economies today, the principal challenge is to establish conditions that will enable them to prosper in a
world where their exchange rates adjust more freely to changing fundamentals.

Capital-account liberalization
A third important conclusion from the crises relates to strategies for capital-account liberalization.
Although this was not the conventional wisdom at the time, I think the evidence supports the view that
the policy mistakes that contributed to the crises lay not in the decision to become more open to
capital flows, but in the how those governments chose to become more open.
The supervisory and regulatory regimes over the financial system did not provide a strong enough
framework of incentives for risk management and controls over financial intermediaries. But the more
consequential mistake was that the crisis economies each in different ways chose to liberalize capital
controls selectively. Each had in place other incentives or distortions that led to an excessive reliance
on short-term borrowing through the banking system.
These weaknesses left the financial system and the economies as a whole with less capacity to
manage the greater pressures and risks that came with openness to capital flows.
The policy consensus that has emerged from this experience has a more cautious view of the benefits
of financial integration, a greater awareness of the damage caused by creating incentives that distort
the composition of flows and a greater appreciation of the importance of having in place a strong set of
institutions, in the financial system in particular. It has also fostered a greater skepticism within
governments of their ability to sustain and adjust a set of limited controls on capital flows, once an
economy has passed a certain point of relative openness. Money tends to move around these controls
with progressive ease, and it becomes more difficult over time to counteract this force with acceptable
costs to other objectives. For this basic reason, many emerging market governments that were early
proponents of selective controls have moved to eliminate them.
Faced with the challenges of managing policy in an increasingly integrated world economy, the
dominant instinct of officials is often to try to shield the economy from volatility. But the crises of the
1990s helped demonstrate why this approach can be both futile and counterproductive. As economies
become more open to capital flows, policies designed to insulate an economy from external shocks,
whether they be fixed exchange rate regimes or selective capital controls and restrictions on
international transactions, rarely offer durable stability, and they bring additional risks. These risks
come in the form of additional distortions that might undermine future growth or magnify vulnerability to
future financial volatility.
The more promising approach is to invest in the complement of institutions and policies that enable an
economy to live more comfortably with openness. Focusing on those measures that will enable an
economy to be more flexible and to adapt more quickly to change ultimately will be a more effective
policy strategy. It is politically more difficult, but economically more effective than those solutions that
seem to offer protection from competition and volatility.

Crisis resolution
A fourth lesson, or series of lessons, comes from our experience in crisis resolution. The strategies
adopted to stabilize markets and then to foster recovery varied significantly across the crisis
economies. Each involved a somewhat different mix of policy reforms and temporary financial
assistance, tailored to the different conditions that prevailed.
Where there was success, the common feature was what Larry Summers called the Powell Doctrine
applied to international finance – the overwhelming use of force, with a clear strategy for resolution.
The “force” in this sense applied both to the scale of financing made available relative to the need and
to the quality of the policy measures.
Very substantial resources were deployed in support of the recovery efforts, and a large share of the
resources was made available upfront, in order to try to mitigate the liquidity problem and to stem the
loss of confidence. In contrast to the typical IMF program, governments were permitted to use a

BIS Review 69/2007

3

portion of the IMF-supplied resources to take some pressure off the exchange rate, as foreign
investors sought to reduce their exposures to the crisis countries in the initial stages of the crises.
But the provision of large external financial resources was not, by itself, sufficient to achieve stability.
The critical feature of every program was a set of policy measures designed to address the causes of
the crisis, to stabilize confidence and to put in place conditions for recovery.
In some cases, the initial policy response looked tentative or inadequate. In others, the reform
program did not appear to have broad support within the government. Broader political uncertainty
associated with a pending election or change in leadership also undermined confidence in the
commitment to a credible recovery plan. Where confidence in the recovery plan was weak, the
financial resources had little impact on market sentiment and confidence faltered. Even though the
resources looked large relative to past financial interventions, they were easily overwhelmed when
markets were unimpressed by the policy response.
Ernesto Zedillo explained the policy challenge exceptionally well when he wrote that since markets
tend to overreact at the onset of crisis, so policy needs to overreact too.
A classic problem in financial crises is to distinguish between problems of illiquidity and insolvency.
This diagnosis is critical to the design of an effective response, but it is very hard to do. We – in this
case I mean the IMF, its major creditors and the governments in the region – treated these cases as
closer to the illiquidity extreme on the continuum, rather than to the insolvency extreme.
In the Asian crisis countries, unlike in Russia or Argentina, there was no plausible case for arguing that
the sovereign governments had accumulated debts they were unable to repay. A forced restructuring
of the external debt of a country or a forced suspension of payments on those obligations would have
made the crisis in Asia, and more broadly, substantially worse.
These were not conditions of insolvency, but nor were they purely temporary liquidity problems that
could have been addressed through the quick infusion of unconditional finance without any change in
policies. The crisis economies all tried that strategy in the weeks and in some cases months before
going to the IMF for assistance. Those strategies failed not simply because the governments ran out of
reserves, but because they had failed to embrace a broader set of policy changes powerful enough to
restore confidence in future stability and growth.
It is worth emphasizing that the strategies ultimately adopted in each case were quite unorthodox and
were certainly not uniform. Besides the novel approach adopted in terms of the scale and structure of
financing and the degree of international cooperation in support of the programs, the policy packages
were also notable in the degree of emphasis placed on, for example, financial-sector reform and
improvements to disclosure.
In each case, the reforms proposed were the result of careful analysis of the causes of the individual
crises and a pragmatic assessment of what was needed to correct the conditions that had led to
problems and to restore confidence. And in all cases, the strategy was continually modified and
adjusted as conditions changed and as the principals responsible developed a better feel for what was
working and what was not.

Conclusion
Recovery in the Asian crisis countries took time, but it was stronger and more rapid than had been
typical in other emerging market financial crises. Barely 18 months after the crisis, for example,
Korean GDP had returned to pre-crisis levels, and this was true for all the Asian crisis countries by
2003. Growth has been relatively strong and stable since, though at a pace somewhat below the
unsustainable rates of the decade prior to the crises.
The countries directly affected by the crises a decade ago are fundamentally stronger. The balance
sheet weaknesses have been transformed into strength. Financial-sector reforms have been
undertaken on a generally impressive scale. Stronger legal and institutional frameworks have helped
create an environment in which enterprise is thriving. Macroeconomic policy has been reasonably
prudent, and debt-to-GDP ratios are declining. Exchange rate regimes have become more flexible.
These changes have made these economies far more resilient than they were a decade ago. They are
much less likely to face the type of crisis, the acute, self-reinforcing panic produced by the balance
sheet problems of that era.

4

BIS Review 69/2007

Is there more to be done? Of course, but the challenge now is not so much the challenge of building
stronger defenses against crisis, but rather the longer-term challenge of building a greater capacity to
adapt to change in this increasingly integrated and rapidly evolving global economy.
Thank you.

BIS Review 69/2007

5

Timothy F Geithner: The economic dynamics of global integration
Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Forum on Global Leadership: US Competitiveness in a
Globally Integrated Economy, Washington DC, 25 July 2007.
*

*

*

We are meeting at a time of relatively favorable U.S. economic performance, but also of
growing concern about our relative position in the world and our longer-term economic
prospects at home.
On a wide range of measures, the American economy and American business are
performing well. We are in the fifth year of expansion in the United States and in the midst of
the strongest global economic expansion in more than three decades. Corporate profits as a
share of GDP are close to the highest level in four decades.
Corporate balance sheets are healthy. The six-month trailing bond default rate has stayed
near zero this year, and the delinquency rate on commercial and industrial loans at banks
remains extremely low.
We have seen a substantial acceleration in trend productivity growth over the past decade.
And although productivity gains have slowed recently, as they typically do as expansions
mature, U.S. companies remain at the forefront of changes in science and technology—and
in the application of those innovations to business processes across a range of industries.
Overall, the U.S. economy continues to display remarkable resilience and flexibility, despite a
range of adverse shocks. This is a remarkably favorable picture; and yet there is growing
concern about the long-term challenges for the U.S. economy and their implications for future
prosperity.
In parts of the business community, there is growing anxiety about a perceived shift in the
locus of dynamism and growth away from the United States toward Asia and other parts of
the world.
Public opinion surveys report increased concern among Americans about economic security;
about the prospects for future income growth and economic mobility; and about the
implications of the long-term increase in income inequality.
And there we can see growing concern among the general public and in the business
community about the struggle to find a political consensus to support reforms to help us meet
these challenges.
The United States has long been one of the most open of the major economies. This basic
policy choice, along with a range of other actions that have made our economy relatively
flexible, has allowed us to be a substantial beneficiary of the rapid increase in global
economic integration and in the growing economic success of the rest of the world.
Globalization has brought challenges as well as benefits, however. The combined forces of
technological change, immigration, and the rapid integration of China, India, and other
economies into the world economy are altering the dynamics of competitive pressures on
U.S. companies. The pace of change seems to be increasing, and more things we produce,
and more of our services, are becoming tradable. And this seems to have fed anxiety, among
firms and their employees, about the challenges in coping with these forces.
These changes have taken place in the context of a longer-term increase in income
inequality in the United States. Incomes have grown more rapidly for the richer and better
educated than for those at lower points of the income scale.

BIS Review 84/2007

1

These changes have, in turn, contributed to some erosion in the strength of the political
center in the United States on a range of economic policy issues. Surveys suggest
diminished support for global trade. And there is more divisiveness on a range of issues such
as tax policy and the appropriate role for government in the regulation of economic activity.
Over the last half century and more, the U.S. economy has enjoyed some substantial and
important relative advantages. Among the most important of these are the quality of our best
universities; our openness to change; the incentives provided for innovation; the strength of
property rights; the depth and liquidity of our world-class financial markets; and a record of
stability in macroeconomic policy.
These relative strengths of the U.S. economy remain significant and substantial. But the rest
of the world is getting better at establishing the important conditions for dynamism and
innovation. These improvements are not a reflection of U.S. weakness, nor are they
themselves a threat to U.S. competitiveness. We will benefit from more rapid growth in the
rest of the world, but at the same time we need to be more attentive to addressing a range of
challenges that could ultimately damage the prospect for future growth in living standards
here at home.
I want to talk about challenges we face in four areas:
•

sustaining support for global economic integration,

•

the role of public policy in education and other areas that are critical to our capacity
to adapt to change,

•

regulation and the role of the market, and

•

macroeconomic policy.

Let me start with openness.
The pressures that have come with globalization and technological change have led many to
suggest that we should become less open as a country, that we should slow the pace of
integration, or that we should provide greater insulation or protection from competition for
selective parts of the U.S. economy.
Moving in this direction would, I believe, be a fundamental mistake. More than ever before
our fortunes are linked to those of the global economy. If anything, we need to become more
open, not less; more open to trade in goods and services, but also to investment, to people
and to ideas.
Global integration is not the solution to all our problems, but acting to restrict it or to insulate
us from its consequences would damage our capacity to grow and to adapt to change, and
these costs would make it harder, not easier, to deal with our longer-term challenges. To the
extent we are reluctant to remove restrictions or subsidies in the United States, we make it
easier for the forces in other countries to block reforms from which we would benefit.
The world has a lot of experience with the costs and benefits of protection, and the balance
of judgment on those questions has not significantly changed even with all the changes that
technology and policy have brought to global trade. Economies that are more open have
generally seen more rapid growth, both in incomes and in employment. Economies that are
less open have generally grown less rapidly.
Openness itself, of course, is not enough.
Our capacity to adapt to change depends in part on the effectiveness of government policy in
a range of important areas. Education seems the most obvious of these, but policy in health
care, in public infrastructure, and many other areas will also play an increasingly important
role in determining the relative strength of the U.S. economy in this more integrated world.
The U.S. educational system combines the strengths of high completion rates for secondary
education, a rich variety of post-secondary school educational options, and exceptionally

2

BIS Review 84/2007

strong elite universities, with the weaknesses of substantial unevenness in the quality of
public education, and large disparities in the educational opportunities available to those of
modest income and the relatively rich. By some estimates, students from families in the
bottom half of the income distribution account for only 10 percent of all places in our elite
universities.
An education system should be judged by how it serves the majority of the population, not
just the performance of its best institutions. And as technological progress continues and
global integration increases, our system will be judged by how good a job it does equipping a
broader range of students with the skills commensurate with these challenges. In
communities across the country, there are encouraging efforts at experimentation and
reform. Progress is probably going to require more substantial public investments in
education going forward.
Health care does not usually make the agenda of conferences on competitiveness, but we’re
seeing a welcome wave of attention in the business community to the broader economic
imperative of health care reform. The U.S. system has compelling strengths in the quality of
care and the choices available to much of the population. But our system is also remarkable
for the magnitude of the costs, the incidence of those costs across the economy, the number
of uninsured, and our poor performance on health outcomes even compared with less
wealthy economies. To cite just one example, infant mortality rates in the United States are
more than two times the level in Japan.
In a world in which economic performance depends increasingly on flexibility and adaptability
to change, we probably need to move to a system in which a change in employer or
profession does not carry the substantial uncertainty it does today about how one will provide
for one’s health and that of one’s family. This seems fundamental to the willingness of
Americans to support the level of openness to trade and to change that is an essential part of
our present and our future.
A defining feature of the American economy has been our embrace of the market, and the
recognition that market forces are, in general, the most effective way of allocating resources.
But markets cannot solve all problems, and government policy plays an important role in how
well markets function. The test of policy is not just in the incentives we create for competition
and innovation, but also in the clarity and stability offered by the regulatory framework and in
the quality of public goods that governments deliver.
Any one who travels outside the United States today returns with an appreciation about how
rapidly public infrastructure is improving in many parts of the world, relative to what is evident
in many parts of the United States.
As global markets become more integrated and companies and capital can move more freely
across borders, policymakers will face new challenges in the design of regulations. They will
have to look more carefully at the balance of benefits and costs, when companies have more
choice about where to invest. They will have to find ways for regulations to evolve more
quickly in response to developments in markets. They will have to explore ways to cooperate
more closely with other governments, where national approaches alone cannot be effective.
We need to get used to a world in which we will see, in many areas, less willingness to adopt
a U.S. model or to defer to a U.S. view on the appropriate global standard.
You can see some of these dynamics in the financial arena, and concern about the erosion
in the relative position of the U.S. financial system.
Financial markets outside the United States are now deeper and more liquid than they used
to be, making it easier for companies to raise capital domestically at reasonable cost. These
financial markets are at an earlier stage in the process of capital market development, and
they will therefore experience rapid growth in securitization and the role of derivatives.

BIS Review 84/2007

3

These factors, more than other differences in tax, accounting, or legal regulatory regimes,
account for the bulk of the declines' share of equity and debt raised in the United States by
companies around the world. And this shift is something that we benefit from, not just in the
direct sense that U.S. financial institutions play an important role in those markets, but in the
broader sense that we will gain from the improvements in economic growth that come from
financial market development around the world.
But in this context, we need to be more attentive to the risk that specific aspects of our
system, regulations or other constraints, create a greater disincentive to locate a financial
business here, or to invest here, or to raise capital here, than would have been the case five
or ten years ago. We need to take a careful look at how we regulate financial activity in a
world where capital is more mobile, and the structure of the financial system has diverged
substantially from the system for which our regulatory framework was designed.
That does not mean we should contemplate weaker regulation or lower standards. The
strength of the U.S. system is in part the result of the confidence we have developed in the
integrity and resilience of our markets, in part by establishing strong standards for investor
protection, market practices, and safety and soundness. Sustaining this confidence will be
critical to the future strength of our financial system.
To complete this list of policy challenges that are important to U.S. competitiveness, let me
conclude with a few brief points on the broader imperatives of macroeconomic policy.
The United States faces very substantial gaps between our fiscal resources and our
expenditure commitments. The size of these gaps, these deficits, have been masked in
recent years by a substantial, unanticipated and probably transitory surge in revenues, and
by an unusually long period of unusually low long-term interest rates, in part the
consequence of foreign official capital flows.
But these gaps remain substantial and the U.S. fiscal position is unsustainable. Time does
not help. We are going to have to begin to develop a political consensus on the mix of policy
changes that can bring our commitment and resources more into balance, if we are to
preserve confidence in our market and our long-term economic prospects.
One of the most important roles for public policy is the maintenance of a stable
macroeconomic framework that enables firms to make long-term investment decisions. In
this sense, the fiscal policy choices ahead for this country will be critically important to the
overall environment in which U.S. enterprises operate.
The business community will play an important role in shaping the policy response to these
longer-term economic challenges. These reforms will have a long fuse. The benefits will be
shared broadly, rather than captured specifically by particular sectors of the economy.
American companies have a strong collective interest in sustaining public support for global
integration, improving the quality of public goods the government provides in education,
health care and infrastructure, and in preserving confidence in U.S. fiscal sustainability.
Thank you.

4

BIS Review 84/2007

Timothy F Geithner: Restoring market liquidity in a financial crisis
Welcoming remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Second New York Fed-Princeton University
Liquidity Conference, New York, 13 December 2007.
*

*

*

Welcome to the New York Fed and to this conference on liquidity. You are addressing some
of the most important issues affecting financial markets today. Your timing is good, perhaps
too good. We are all going to need some time and perspective before we will know enough to
draw conclusions and recommendations from the events of the past six months. The
conditions that led to this crisis took a long time to develop and they will take some time to
resolve. I think it is appropriate, though, that as central banks act to address the challenges
in markets today, we also begin to define the agenda for future research and policy.
On December 12, the Federal Reserve and several other major central banks, announced a
series of actions in response to the elevated pressures in funding markets. Together, these
actions provide a more flexible and potentially more effective set of instruments, alongside
our conventional monetary policy instruments, to help mitigate the risks that liquidity
pressures in markets going forward could pose to the broader economy. With this framework
of tools, we have the capacity to calibrate our response as market conditions change.
Although the specifics vary across central banks, the approaches outlined have several
important common elements. We each have taken actions to provide more financing at terms
longer than overnight. We each have chosen to auction funding against a broader range of
collateral, collateral other than government securities, and in our case with a broader set of
counterparties. And we have activated swap lines to help the relevant central banks provide
liquidity in dollars in their markets.
The initial spark to the pressures we observe in markets today was the sharp deterioration in
the value of nonprime mortgage securities and the resulting increase in uncertainty about the
value of a much larger amount of financial assets exposed to that risk. This was magnified by
a substantial increase in uncertainty about the economic outlook and the consequences of
that uncertainty for asset values and credit losses. Financial institutions faced a sharp drop in
demand for a range of assets, impairing the securitization market as a source of funding. And
a substantial amount of these illiquid assets were held in vehicles with implicit or explicit
liquidity guarantees provided by banks. This produced a large unexpected increase in
demand for funding from banks at the same time banks confronted a reduced capacity to
raise financing.
As market participants have adjusted to what has been a very acute change in expectations
about economic and credit risk, they have become more cautious in how they use their
liquidity and capital. The symptoms of this are apparent in the high risk premia across a
range of assets, as well as in the dramatic contraction in the volume of transactions for
certain assets and the securities that reference those assets. Elevated term premia in the
interbank market has the effect of tightening overall financial conditions, offsetting some of
the impact of reductions in the target federal funds rate.
The danger this poses is the risk of an adverse, self-reinforcing dynamic in which concerns
about overall liquidity magnify concerns about credit problems. As financial institutions
prepare for a more challenging funding environment, in part by conserving capital, and as
they anticipate the higher potential losses that would normally accompany an economic
slowdown, their response, in aggregate, makes markets and the economy potentially more
vulnerable to that adverse outcome. The risk is a greater contraction in the availability of
credit beyond what might have otherwise occurred, with attendant risks to growth.

BIS Review 149/2007

1

Monetary policy has an important role to play in addressing these dynamics in markets. By
adjusting policy proactively as the risk to the outlook changes, central banks can help reduce
the probability of the extreme adverse outcome. And this can positively affect the incentives
that might otherwise lead market participants to protect themselves against the extreme
outcome.
Central banks have been employing a range of different tools to help reduce the incentive for
an excessive level of liquidity hoarding by banks that might impede an efficient flow of
liquidity among banks. Although the mix of tools and approaches has varied across the major
economies, each has tried to provide a more effective form of liquidity insurance to its
financial institutions by expanding the capacity of banks to borrow at longer maturities from
the central banks against a broader range of collateral.
The actions to address liquidity issues – those we announced this week and those that we
have taken over the past five months – can help reinforce our monetary policy actions by
providing greater assurance for market participants of access to funding. By allowing strong
banks to borrow against collateral that they can no longer easily finance in the market, the
central bank is providing an additional source of liquidity to banks as a complement to our
open market operations.
The Term Auction Facility gives us a tool that lies somewhere between our open market
operations and our primary credit program. It provides a mechanism for expanding the range
of collateral against which we provide funds to the market – in effect to change the
composition of our balance sheet – in ways we cannot do through traditional open market
operations. And it does this in a way that may be more effective in mitigating a broader
marketwide liquidity shortage than does the existing discount window facility, in part because
of the perceived stigma in recourse to a facility that has come to be regarded as a source of
funds for individual institutions facing a temporary, exceptional need for liquidity. Because the
quantity of funds to be injected is known in advance, this mechanism poses fewer
complications for our ability to reduce volatility in the fed funds rate around the target.
The auction facility and other measures we have taken to address market liquidity problems
do not directly address the balance sheet or capital constraints facing financial institutions.
Nor can they be expected directly to reduce the perceived risk in exposure to other financial
counterparties. But by providing a more effective form of access to liquidity, these new
measures can help reduce the uncertainty that gives institutions the incentive to secure
liquidity in ways that might lead to a further deterioration on market conditions.
Major financial institutions in the United States and elsewhere entered this period of
adjustment with capital substantially above the various regulatory thresholds. These capital
cushions have enabled banks to expand their balance sheets as they have met contingent
commitments and as the economics of other non-bank financing vehicles have deteriorated.
This has been an important part of the adjustment process in markets.
We have also seen some early steps by a range of different institutions to bring new capital
into the banking and financial system. This is a healthy development. It reduces the need for
further asset sales to preserve capital ratios. And it gives those institutions that acted earlier
and on a more substantial scale the flexibility to play a greater role in markets and in the
economy going forward.
Finally, let me say something about future challenges in this area that are of special
relevance to today’s conference and to the research agenda in which you are all engaged.
We are already involved in a coordinated review with other central banks and supervisors of
how we should adapt policy and supervision in the wake of this financial crisis. Two issues
are of particular interest in the context of this conference.
The first relates to the incentives we create, through regulation and supervision and other
policies, for influencing how financial market participants manage liquidity risk. Several
aspects of the existing capital framework and other parts of the policy and regulatory

2

BIS Review 149/2007

framework affect these incentives. In addition, the evolution of the financial system has
altered the role and importance of liquidity provision by banks and how that provision of
liquidity responds to different types of stress to the financial system.
The second issue relates to the tools that central banks have at their disposal for providing
liquidity in ways that do support our monetary policy objectives. Do we need additional
instruments that would better enable us to mitigate marketwide liquidity problems? And how
can we mitigate the moral hazard risk inherent in such instruments?
Efforts are underway to address these issues both within the Fed and among our central
banking colleagues around the world. We will be looking both to financial market participants
and to the academic community for advice.
For now, though, our principal task is to address the challenges of the present. The Federal
Reserve Act gives us broad authority to act in response to these types of conditions. We will
continue to examine ways to adapt our instruments as market conditions evolve. We will do
so in close cooperation with other central banks, as indeed we have since August. And we
will do so in the tradition of pragmatism and flexibility that has been one of the defining
features of the central bank of the United States.
Thank you.

BIS Review 149/2007

3

Timothy F Geithner: The current financial challenges – policy and
regulatory implications
Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Council on Foreign Relations Corporate Conference 2008,
New York, 6 March 2008.
*

*

*

I am going to talk today about some of the challenges facing the U.S. and financial system.
These problems took a long time to build up, and, even with a forceful mix of public policy
and action by the private sector, they will take time to resolve.
The central questions are: what caused the crisis and what explains its severity? What mix of
policy measures will best contain the damage? And what changes to the financial system are
likely to produce greater stability and resilience in the future?
Origins
The origins of this crisis lie in complex interaction of number of forces. Some were the
product of market forces. Some were the product of market failures. Some were the result of
incentives created by policy and regulation. Some of these were evident at the time, others
are apparent only with the benefit of hindsight. Together they produced a substantial financial
boom on a global scale.
In the five years leading up to the present stress, the world experienced an unusual mix of
financial conditions.
Real short-term interest rates were reduced around the world, following a nearly decade long
secular decline in inflation rates, a slowdown in growth at the turn of this decade and
subsequent deflation. As central banks raised their policy rates when the outlook improved
and deflation risks had dissipated, both real and nominal long-term interest rates remained
anomalously low.
Global savings appeared to rise faster than did perceived real investment opportunities, and
this development helped to push down real long-term interest rates around the world. At the
same time, many emerging market economies built up very large levels of official reserves to
reduce external vulnerability and to hold the value of their currencies stable against the
dollar. The exchange rate policies in these economies – economies that together accounted
for a increasing share of global GDP – made overall global financial conditions more
accommodative, even as the United States and other countries tightened their monetary
policies.
Expected and realized volatility in both debt and equity markets were remarkably low for
most of the last half a decade. Term premiums declined and remained low over much of this
period. Credit spreads across a wide range of asset classes fell to levels that assumed
unusually low levels of future losses. In the United States, credit, and mortgage credit in
particular, expanded relative to GDP. Many households – including those previously lacking
access to credit or with access only to expensive credit – found they could borrow on a
significant scale to finance the purchase of a home and other expenses. Prices rose across a
range of real and financial assets, most notably the prices of homes.
This constellation of broad economic and financial conditions was accompanied by rapid
innovation in financial instruments that made credit risk easier to trade and, in principle at
least, to hedge. These instruments allowed investors to buy insurance or protection against a
broader range of individual credit risks, such as the default by a home owner or a company.
Issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS), collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and

BIS Review 27/2008

1

collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), as well as credit default swaps (CDS), expanded on a
dramatic scale, particularly from 2005 through to mid-2007. And over this same period, the
composition of the assets in ABS, as well as in CDOs and CLOs, shifted to higher credit risk
mortgages and loans issued by noninvestment grade companies.
Even though these instruments allow credit risk to be shared, their holders remain exposed
to the less probable, but potentially very damaging effects of a significant increase in losses
driven by macroeconomic factors. As underwriting standards deteriorated over this period,
this exposure grew. And yet risk premia continued to fall, suggesting that investors did not
fully appreciate the dynamic that was at work. As the boom persisted, investors grew more
confident in the relative stability of macro and financial conditions and in the high levels of
liquidity of the recent past, and projected that stability into the future. That confidence in a
more stable future led to greater leverage and a larger exposure to the risk of a less benign
world.
The interaction of these forces made the financial system as a whole more vulnerable to a
range of different weaknesses. The models used by issuers to structure these products and
by credit rating agencies to assess risk and assign ratings turned out to be much more
sensitive to macroeconomic assumptions than was apparent to investors at the time.
Assumptions about home price appreciation and the correlation of defaults within the
underlying collateral pool were particularly critical in this context.
The proliferation of credit risk transfer instruments was driven in part by an assumption of
frictionless, uninterrupted liquidity. This left credit and funding markets more vulnerable when
liquidity receded. Banks and other financial institutions lent substantial amounts of money on
the assumption that they would be able to distribute that risk easily into liquid markets. A
sizable fraction of long-term assets – assets with exposure to different forms of credit risk –
ended up in vehicles financed with very short-term liabilities and was placed with investors
and funds that were also exposed to liquidity risk.
As is often the case during periods of rapid change, more significant concentrations of risk
were present than was apparent at the time. Banks and investment banks sold insurance
against what seemed like low probability events, but did so at what even at the time seemed
like low prices. And on the assets they retained, these same institutions purchased insurance
from financial guarantors and other firms that were exposed to the same risks.
The crisis exposed a range of weaknesses in risk management practices within financial
institutions in the United States and throughout the world. Today, a group of the primary
supervisors of the largest banks and investment banks in the world released a
comprehensive assessment of risk management practices in these institutions. This
assessment will help lay the foundation for consensus on changes to supervision going
forward in the major financial centers. The report examines a range of practices that helped
determine relative performance during this crisis. Banks and investment banks with stronger
risk management practices and cultures did substantially better. The most common failures
were in how firms dealt with uncertainty about the scale of losses they would face in a less
benign economic and financial environment; the scale of the cushion they built up against
that uncertainty; how well they managed the internal tension between risk and reward; and
how quickly they moved to mitigate risk as conditions deteriorated.
The typical arsenal of risk management tools relies, by necessity, on history and experience,
and as a result has only limited value in assessing the scale of potential future losses. These
limitations were particularly damaging in a period in which significant innovation in financial
instruments and market structure was coupled with relatively stable macroeconomic and
financial conditions. Uncertainty about the future, and the greater complexity of leveraged
structured products, created a dense fog around estimates of potential loss, making
institutions and markets more vulnerable to an adverse surprise when conditions changed,
and making it harder to manage the many principal agent problems inherent in the financial
business.

2

BIS Review 27/2008

In effect, some major banks and investments banks made the choice to follow the market
down as underwriting practices eroded. They took on more exposure to low probability but
extremely adverse events, despite the potential consequences of getting caught when the
music stopped. And even though the largest firms were able to move quickly to protect
themselves as conditions worsened, those actions had significant negative effects on market
functioning and liquidity.
The current episode has a basic dynamic in common with all past crises. As market
participants have moved to reduce exposure to further losses, to step on the brake, the brake
became the accelerator, amplifying the shock. Measured risk has increased more quickly
than many institutions have been able reduce it, and attempts to reduce it have added to
volatility and downward pressure on prices, further increasing measured exposure to risk.
Uncertainty about the market value of securities and about counterparty credit risk has
increased, and many hedges have not performed as intended. The rational actions taken by
even the strongest financial institutions to reduce exposure to future losses have caused
significant collateral damage to market functioning. This, in turn, has intensified the liquidity
problems for a wide range of bank and nonbank financial institutions.
In this environment, banks have faced several different types of liquidity and funding
challenges. They have been called on to fund a range of different contingent liquidity and
credit commitments, as is typically the case in crises. The substantial impairment of
securitization and syndication markets has been an additional challenge because it has
reduced banks’ access to liquidity and their capacity to move assets off balance sheets. As
the market value of many securities has declined, and investors have reduced their
willingness to finance more risky assets, liquidity conditions have eroded further. In
response, even the strongest institutions have become much more cautious, building up
large cushions of liquidity, bringing down leverage and reducing financing for their leveraged
counterparties.
Policy measures
The self-reinforcing dynamic within financial markets has intensified the downside risks to
growth for an economy that is already confronting a very substantial adjustment in housing
and the possibility of a significant rise in household savings.
The intensity of the crisis is in part a function of the size of the preceding financial boom, but
also of the speed of the deterioration in confidence about the prospects for growth and in
some of the basic features of our financial markets. The damage to confidence – confidence
in ratings, in valuation tools, in the capacity of investors to evaluate risk – will prolong the
process of adjustment in markets. This process carries with it risks to the broader economy.
Macroeconomic and supervisory policies have an important role to play in containing those
risks.
Let me mention several critical areas of policy.
Monetary policy
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has reduced the nominal federal funds rate
target substantially in a relatively short period of time, with much of this reduction occurring
ahead of the deterioration in confidence and the broader slowdown in spending that is now
apparent. But even with those reductions in short-term interest rates in place, financial
conditions have tightened as risk spreads on a wide range of asset classes and institutions
have increased considerably. The critical risk to the economic outlook remains the potential
for the strains in financial markets to have an outsized adverse effect on real economic
activity, particularly by exacerbating the already significant weakness in the housing sector. It
is important for monetary policy and liquidity instruments to be used proactively in addressing
this risk.

BIS Review 27/2008

3

But this is not the only challenge we face. Headline and core inflation have come in higher
than anticipated, and inflation expectations have also moved up. If the risk of significant
damage to growth from these financial market pressures is attenuated and if global growth
remains strong and drives a continuing rise in energy and commodity prices, then inflation
may not moderate as much as we anticipate. If the medium term outlook for inflation
deteriorates significantly, the FOMC will move with appropriate speed and force to address
this risk.
This requires a fine balance. The principal challenge for policy is to provide an adequate
degree of insurance against the downside risks that still confront the economy as a whole,
without adding to concerns about inflation over the medium term. We cannot know with
confidence today what level of the short-term real funds rate will be consistent with our
objectives of sustainable growth and low inflation, but if turbulent financial conditions and the
associated downside risks to growth persist, monetary policy may have to remain
accommodative for some time.
Liquidity provision
Although concerns about credit quality are at the root of the current problems in financial
markets, a substantial impairment in market liquidity conditions can exacerbate and prolong
the adjustment in credit conditions. To mitigate this risk, we have taken a series of actions to
help reduce the risk that market liquidity conditions exacerbate the adjustment process in
credit markets.
By allowing institutions to finance with the central bank assets they could no longer finance
as easily in the market, we have reduced the need for them to take other actions, such as
selling other assets into distressed markets, or withdrawing credit lines extended to other
financial institutions, that would have amplified pressures in markets. These measures – the
Term Auction Facility and swap arrangements – have had some success in mitigating market
pressures, in part by providing a form of insurance against future stress. We now have in
place a cooperative framework for liquidity provision among the major central banks. And we
have considerable flexibility to adjust the dimensions of these liquidity tools. We will keep
them in place as long as necessary, and continue to adapt them where we see a compelling
case to do so.
Encouraging financial repair
The Federal Reserve is working closely with other financial supervisors and regulators to
facilitate the adjustment underway in markets. This approach has two important elements.
The first is to encourage improvements in the quality of valuation methods and disclosure by
the major regulated financial institutions and the necessary adjustment in valuations and
reserves to reflect the deterioration in expected losses. Better disclosure can reduce some
uncertainty about the incidence and magnitude of potential losses across the financial
system, although it is important to note that these estimates of losses are a function of the
outlook for the economy and will necessarily change as expectations of the future change.
The second element is to encourage new equity capital raising, so that the burden for
preserving capital ratios does not fall principally on actions, such as asset sales or reduced
lending, that might exacerbate the credit crunch. We have seen a very substantial flow of
new capital into the financial system much more quickly than has been the case in past
crises. More will come. Those institutions that move more quickly will obviously be in a
stronger position to deal with the challenges, and take advantage of the opportunities, ahead.
Fiscal stimulus
Monetary policy can, of course, play a powerful role in reducing the downside risks to growth,
but overall policy will be more effective, particularly given the strains to the financial sector, if

4

BIS Review 27/2008

the full burden does not fall on the tools available to the Federal Reserve. Fiscal policy can
play an important role. The stimulus program signed into law by the President will provide a
meaningful level of support to growth, somewhere in the range of three quarters to one and
half of a percentage point of GDP growth over the next few quarters.
Targeted support for housing
Policy can also play an important role in helping cushion the effects of the fall in housing
prices and the rise in foreclosures in the United States. The decline in house prices and the
surge in foreclosures now underway will have significant spillovers to other homes in the
same neighborhoods, effects that are not fully incorporated into decisions by private creditors
and investors to workout mortgages on mutually beneficial terms. The degree to which
mortgages are now held in securitized and complex leverage structures exacerbates the
incentive and coordination problems inherent in this situation. Carefully designed, targeted
programs in cooperation with the private sector can play an important role in resolving the
various constraints that are now impeding economically viable mortgage restructurings.
Given the breakdowns in the securitization process and its potential impact on the supply of
new mortgage credit, it also makes sense to explore ways to expand the scope for existing
government programs to support financing of new homes.
This policy framework – macroeconomic stimulus, liquidity support, new equity for the
financial system, and targeted support for housing – will help reduce the risks to the outlook
and bring about an earlier return to growth rates more in line with the economy’s long term
potential.
Longer term reforms of the financial system
The unwinding of this global financial boom has caused a substantial degree of stress to the
financial system.
Was this preventable? I don’t believe that asset price and credit booms are preventable.
They cannot be effectively diffused preemptively. There is no reliable early warning system
for financial shocks. And yet policy plays an important role in determining the dimensions of
financial booms, and policy helps determine the ability of the financial system and the
economy to adjust to its aftermath. We need to undertake a broad set of changes to address
the vulnerabilities in our financial system revealed by this crisis. Just as a long list of factors
contributed to the trauma, there is no single reform that offers the promise of sufficient
change.
The Presidents Working Group on Financial Markets and the Financial Stability Forum, which
bring together policymakers and regulators from the major financial centers around the world,
are in the process of outlining a comprehensive framework of reforms. Many of these
recommendations will focus on changes to the mortgage finance market, the ratings process
for ABS and structured credit products more broadly, regulatory and accounting treatment of
these instruments and special purpose financing vehicles, the disclosure requirements on
instruments and institutions, and other dimensions of the securitization process.
I want to conclude with a few comments on some of the broader policy questions we face in
designing these reforms.
Regulatory reform and simplification
The regulations that affect incentives in the U.S. financial system have evolved into a very
complex and uneven framework, with substantial opportunities for arbitrage, large gaps in
coverage, significant inefficiencies, and large differences in the degree of oversight and
restraint upon institutions that engage in very similar economic activities. Some illustrations
of this include the large shift in subprime mortgage originations to less regulated institutions;

BIS Review 27/2008

5

the incentives to shift risk to where accounting and capital treatment is more favorable; and
the amount of risk built up in entities that operate in the grey areas of implied support from
much larger affiliated institutions.
We need to move to a simpler framework, with a more uniform set of rules applied evenly
across entities involved in similar functions, and a more effective balance of regulation and
market discipline. And institutions that are banks, or are built around banks, with special
access to the safety net, need to be subject to a stronger form of consolidated supervision
than our current framework provides.
Capital
The U.S. banking system entered this financial shock with capital cushions significantly
above the regulatory thresholds, and in a stronger position to withstand a downturn than was
the case in the past. This has made it possible for bank balance sheets to expand rapidly,
which in turn has helped offset the effects of the withdrawal of many nonbank financial
institutions from credit markets.
Yet the shock absorbers in the financial system as a whole – the financial cushions that are
critical to financial stability – have proved to be thinner, and behavior has been more procyclical than desirable.
This is in part the consequence of changes in the structure of the financial system. Because
banks are now a smaller share of the system, a given level of stress on nonbanks creates
greater strain on the system as a whole. It is in part the consequence of the fact that the
present system focuses on mitigating the risks of firm specific shocks, rather than a
systematic market shock. And it is in part the consequence of the fact that the present
system is not designed to induce institutions, particularly the largest ones, to internalize the
negative consequences, the negative externalities, of their actions on markets as a whole in
conditions of stress.
There is no simple solution to this problem. It requires a broad look at the design of the
present capital regime, the incentives it creates for holding different forms of risk, and the
scope of the application of these requirements. As we move to a more modern and risksensitive capital framework and reduce the perverse incentives in the current capital
requirements, we need to make sure that reserves, capital, and liquidity provisions are more
forward looking, and adjust appropriately through the peaks and valleys of the cycle. This will
increase the scope for banks and other institutions that are subject to risk-based capital
requirements to act more as a stabilizing force in response to future financial market shocks.
Market infrastructure
We are in the midst of a dramatic period of financial innovation and growth in derivative
instruments, but the pace of change the growth in volume has brought a lot of challenges.
Substantial progress has been made to strengthen this infrastructure over the past two and a
half years, and the resilience of the broader financial infrastructure has been a source of
strength for the financial system during this crisis. However, the systems and practices that
support the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives market significantly lags that of securities
markets and other mature markets. We need to move quickly to put in place a more
integrated operational infrastructure that supports all major OTC derivatives products, is
highly automated, has robust operational resilience and risk management, and is capable of
handling very substantial growth in volumes.
Conclusion
The U.S. economic and financial system is undergoing a very challenging period of
adjustment, and we are likely to be living with a high degree of uncertainty for some period of

6

BIS Review 27/2008

time about the ultimate magnitude and duration of the slowdown underway. But it is
important to recognize that we have already seen a lot of adjustment. Prices and risk premia
in many markets already reflect a much more sober and cautious view of the world than they
did a year ago. And the degree of stress on markets that we have seen over the past six
months is due in part to the sheer magnitude and speed of that adjustment to a more
cautious view of the future.
The United States, the world economy, and the financial system as a whole, are more
resilient, than they were on the eve of previous downturns. The improvements in productivity
growth in the United States of the past decade have been followed by significant
improvements in potential growth and wealth accumulation in many other countries. The
scale of investable assets around the globe is very substantial, and this will be an important
source of demand for risk assets. The improvements in monetary policy credibility and in
financial strength developed over the past few decades mean that policy around the world
has more room to adjust to deal with the challenge in the present environment.
Nevertheless, the challenges that remain are substantial. The speed and agility with which
public policy makers and private financial institutions respond to the continuing pressures in
a rapidly evolving environment will determine how quickly and how smoothly market
conditions return to normal – and how rapidly the risks to the economic outlook are mitigated.

BIS Review 27/2008

7

Timothy F Geithner: Actions by the New York Fed in response to liquidity
pressures in financial markets
Testimony of Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, before the US Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and
Urban Affairs, Washington DC, 3 April 2008.
The original speech, which contains three Annexes, can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s
website.

*

*

*

Good morning, Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the
Committee. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to appear before you today. I am here to
outline the actions by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in response to present
challenges in financial markets, including those in relation to the proposed merger of Bear
Stearns and JPMorgan Chase.
On the evening of Thursday, March 13, 2008, I took part in a conference call with
representatives from the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department. On that call, the SEC staff informed us
that Bear Stearns’ funding resources were inadequate to meet its obligations and that the
firm had concluded that it would have to file for bankruptcy protection the next morning. The
SEC said it concurred in that judgment, and it would spend the evening discussing with Bear
what kind of bankruptcy filing was appropriate.
The conference call that evening took place against the backdrop of an extraordinarily
challenging period in the U.S. financial system. This context was critical to the decisions we
made over the next several days. And I think it’s important to start with an explanation of the
broad risks to the economy posed by the crisis now working through the financial system.
The intensity of the crisis we now face in U.S. and global financial markets is a function of the
size and character of the financial boom that preceded it. This was a period of rapid financial
innovation – particularly in credit risk transfer instruments such as credit derivatives and
securitized and structured products. There was considerable growth in leverage, greater
reliance on ratings on structured credit products and a marked deterioration in underwriting
standards.
The innovation in financial products was accompanied by a dramatic increase in the amount
of financial intermediation occurring outside the core banking system. The importance of
securities broker-dealers, hedge funds, and mutual funds in the financial system rose
steadily. Off-balance-sheet vehicles of various forms proliferated, and increased
concentrations of longer-dated assets were held in funding vehicles with substantial liquidity
risk.
The deterioration in the U.S. housing market late in the summer of 2007 precipitated a sharp
rise in uncertainty about the value of securitized or structured assets. Demand for these
assets contracted dramatically and the securitization market for mortgages and other credit
assets stopped working. This, in turn, increased funding pressures for a diverse mix of
financial institutions. Uncertainty about the magnitude and the level of losses for financial
institutions fueled concern about credit risk in exposure to those institutions.
Part of the dynamic at work was that banks were forced to provide financing for – or take
over – the assets in a range of structured investment vehicles and conduits financed by
asset-backed commercial paper. As some investors attempted to liquidate their holdings of
these assets, many of the traditional providers of unsecured funding to banks pulled back
from their counterparties in anticipation of the potential withdrawals of funds by their own
investors.

BIS Review 39/2008

1

Market participants’ willingness to provide term funding even against high-quality collateral
declined dramatically. As a consequence, the cost of unsecured term funding rose
precipitously and the volume shrunk. Banks were funding themselves at shorter and shorter
maturities. As unsecured term funding markets deteriorated, the premium on liquid,
marketable collateral – such as Treasury securities – rose considerably.
Even with the dramatic actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks to address
these liquidity pressures, the strains in financial markets persisted. In many respects,
conditions worsened materially in February and March. Credit spreads on financial
institutions widened, equity prices declined and market functioning deteriorated sharply. By
the early part of March, the threat of a disorderly adjustment was growing.
What we were observing in U.S. and global financial markets was similar to the classic
pattern in financial crises. Asset price declines – triggered by concern about the outlook for
economic performance – led to a reduction in the willingness to bear risk and to margin calls.
Borrowers needed to sell assets to meet the calls; some highly leveraged firms were unable
to meet their obligations and their counterparties responded by liquidating the collateral they
held. This put downward pressure on asset prices and increased price volatility. Dealers
raised margins further to compensate for heightened volatility and reduced liquidity. This, in
turn, put more pressure on other leveraged investors. A self-reinforcing downward spiral of
higher haircuts forced sales, lower prices, higher volatility and still lower prices.
This dynamic poses a number of risks to the functioning of the financial system. It reduces
the effectiveness of monetary policy, as the widening in spreads and risk premia worked to
offset part of the reduction in the fed funds rate. Contagion spreads, transmitting waves of
distress to other markets, from subprime to prime mortgages and even to agency mortgagebacked securities, to commercial mortgage-backed securities and to corporate bonds and
loans. In the current situation, effects were felt in the municipal and student loan markets.
The most important risk is systemic: if this dynamic continues unabated, the result would be
a greater probability of widespread insolvencies, severe and protracted damage to the
financial system and, ultimately, to the economy as a whole. This is not theoretical risk, and it
is not something that the market can solve on its own. It carries the risk of significant damage
to economic activity. Absent a forceful policy response, the consequences would be lower
incomes for working families, higher borrowing costs for housing, education, and the
expenses of everyday life, lower value of retirement savings and rising unemployment.
Federal Reserve response
The Federal Reserve has taken a series of policy actions to help contain the risks to the
economy posed by this financial crisis. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has
reduced the nominal federal funds rate target by 300 basis points since August of 2007.
Alongside these appropriately aggressive monetary actions, the Federal Reserve has taken
a series of initiatives aimed at improving market liquidity and overall market functioning. A
more detailed description of these liquidity initiatives is included as Annex I.
These actions are designed to allow financial intermediaries to finance with the central bank
assets they can no longer finance as easily in the market. And in this way these liquidity
facilities reduce the need for those institutions to take the types of actions, such as selling
other assets into distressed markets or withdrawing credit lines extended to other financial
institutions, that would serve to amplify the pressures in markets.
In addition to these monetary policy and liquidity actions, the Federal Reserve has been
working with community groups and housing advocates across the country to help
homeowners navigate the complex challenges of higher resets and falling home prices. The
Federal Reserve is actively working with homeowners and communities to identify solutions
to avoid foreclosures and their negative effects, support appropriate consumer protection and
responsible lending practices, and apply our expertise in research and evaluation to provide

2

BIS Review 39/20086

community groups, counseling agencies, regulators, and others with detailed analysis to
support efforts to help troubled borrowers and communities.
I believe that the Federal Reserve System’s response has helped reduce the risk of systemic
damage to the financial system, and thereby helped mitigate a potential source of downside
risk to growth. This in turn has helped mitigate the risks to the broader economy. It is
important to recognize that a substantial adjustment, recognition of losses, and reduction in
risk has already taken place. And a range of different prices of financial assets now reflect a
very cautious view of the future. The severity of the pressures in markets evident over the
last few months are in part a reflection of the speed and force with which markets and
institutions in our financial system adapt to fundamental changes in the outlook. This
capacity to adjust and adapt is one of the great strengths of our system. Nevertheless, we
still face a number of challenges ahead. The seeds of this crisis took a long time to build up,
and they will take some time to work through.
The role of banks and investment banks in our financial system
A driving force behind Congress' creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1914 was its
recognition of the need for a public institution to perform the role of lender of last resort. The
financial landscape in 1914 (and continuing until relatively recent times) was one dominated
by traditional banks. When the Federal Reserve was founded, there was no deposit
insurance, so the willingness of individuals and businesses to hold deposits at a particular
bank depended wholly on their degree of trust that the bank would be able to promptly
furnish them with the money they had deposited – whenever they might request it. But – as
Congress understood – the business of banking involves making loans as well as taking
deposits. Because banks, in order to make money, needed to extend long-term credit to
customers for things like the purchases of homes or investments in business equipment, not
all of the money taken in by banks could be readily available to be paid out if depositors were
to request it. In fact, only a small fraction of a typical bank’s assets were kept in liquid enough
form to be immediately paid to depositors upon demand. This fundamental fact of bank
operation left banks – and the banking system – open to liquidity shocks that, nearly a
century later, have their echoes in recent market developments.
The financial crises around the turn of the century were the historic catalyst for the Federal
Reserve’s creation by Congress. It is panic or fear that drives depositors en masse to the
door of the banking house to demand their money back. In such a case, even an institution
that is fundamentally solvent – i.e., whose assets (mostly longer-term loans) are worth more
than its liabilities – may find that it does not have enough cash on hand – that is, enough
liquidity – to satisfy its customers.
The function of a lender of last resort in such a case is to lend to the institution that is facing
heightened customer demand for repayment in an amount sufficient to satisfy customer
demands, while taking assets of the institution as security for the lending. If the lender of last
resort does not act to fulfill this role, the institution facing heightened customer demands for
repayment may be forced to begin a “fire sale” of its assets, the distressed and hurried
nature of which will cause them to be sold at less than their true long-run value, which may
quickly lead to the insolvency of the institution. The insolvency may precipitate further
downward pressure on the market value of such assets magnifying the risk to other financial
institutions.
Over the past 30 years, we have moved from a bank-dominated financial system to a system
in which credit is increasingly extended, securitized and actively traded in a combination of
centralized and decentralized markets. In many ways, the business models of banks and
non-bank financial institutions – especially large securities firms – have converged, with
banks playing a greater agency role in the credit process, and securities firms doing more of
the financing.

BIS Review 39/2008

3

It is important to understand that investment banks now perform many of the economic
functions traditionally associated with commercial banks, and they are also vulnerable to a
sudden loss of liquidity. Unlike commercial banks, which rely significantly on deposits for
funding, investment banks operate according to a business model in which they fund large
portions of their balance sheets on a secured, short-term basis in what is known as the repo
market. Because the assurance of access to short-term secured funding on a daily basis is
such a critical component of business functioning for these entities, they are vulnerable to the
possibility of a sudden pullback in short-term lending, or a reduction in the willingness of
investors to lend against certain classes of securities.
As we have seen throughout the past nine months, these changes in the relative roles of
traditional commercial banks and investment banks have changed the nature of financial
stability. In the United States, the regulatory framework and most of the tools that were
created to prevent and manage financial crises were developed in a bank-dominated era,
and we have had to adapt those tools to deal with current market realities.
Bear Stearns
With this important context, let me return to the actions taken by the Federal Reserve in
response to the situation that arose at Bear Stearns. That response was shaped in roughly
four stages: (1) the decision on the morning of March 14 to extend a non-recourse loan
through the discount window to JPMorgan Chase so that JPMorgan Chase could in turn lend
that money to Bear Stearns; (2) the decision on March 16 by JPMorgan Chase and Bear
Stearns for JPMorgan Chase to acquire Bear and guarantee certain of its liabilities, along
with an agreement in principle that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York would provide
certain financing in the context of that acquisition; (3) the launching of the Primary Dealer
Credit Facility; and (4) the events of the following week, culminating in the March 24
announcement of revised merger agreement and guaranty terms between JPMorgan Chase
and Bear, and the finalizing of the terms and structure of the associated loan from the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Let me begin with the market situation in which Bear was operating in the days leading up to
March 13. Fixed-income traders had begun hearing rumors that European financial
institutions had stopped doing fixed income trades with Bear. Fearing that their funds might
be frozen if Bear wound up in bankruptcy, a number of U.S.-based fixed-income and stock
traders that had been actively involved with Bear had reportedly decided to halt such
involvement. Many firms started pulling back from doing business with Bear. Some hedge
funds that had used Bear to borrow money and clear trades were withdrawing cash from
their accounts. Some large investment banks stopped accepting trades that would expose
them to Bear, and some money market funds reduced their holdings of short-term Bearissued debt. The rumors of Bear’s failing financial health caused its balance of
unencumbered liquidity on March 13 to decline sharply to levels that were not adequate to
cover maturing obligations and funds that could be withdrawn freely. This precipitated the
phone call that I described in the beginning of my testimony.
The news that Bear’s liquidity position was so dire that a bankruptcy filing was imminent
presented us with a very difficult set of policy judgments. In our financial system, the market
sorts out which companies survive and which fail. However, under the circumstances
prevailing in the markets the issues raised in this specific instance extended well beyond the
fate of one company. It became clear that Bear’s involvement in the complex and intricate
web of relationships that characterize our financial system, at a point in time when markets
were especially vulnerable, was such that a sudden failure would likely lead to a chaotic
unwinding of positions in already damaged markets. Moreover, a failure by Bear to meet its
obligations would have cast a cloud of doubt on the financial position of other institutions
whose business models bore some superficial similarity to Bear’s, without due regard for the
fundamental soundness of those firms.

4

BIS Review 39/20086

The sudden discovery by Bear’s derivatives counterparties that important financial positions
they had put in place to protect themselves from financial risk were no longer operative
would have triggered substantial further dislocation in markets. This would have precipitated
a rush by Bear’s counterparties to liquidate the collateral they held against those positions
and to attempt to replicate those positions in already very fragile markets.
In short, we judged that a sudden, disorderly failure of Bear would have brought with it
unpredictable but severe consequences for the functioning of the broader financial system
and the broader economy, with lower equity prices, further downward pressure on home
values, and less access to credit for companies and households.
Following that initial call with the SEC on March 13, my colleagues in New York and in
Washington spent the night focusing on the implications of a large-scale default by Bear and
how we might contain the consequential damage. Bear renewed conversations that began
earlier that day with JPMorgan Chase, which is Bear’s clearing bank for its repo
arrangements, to explore a range of possible financing options. The New York Fed
dispatched a team of examiners to Bear Stearns to look at its books so that we could get a
better handle on what could be done. We gathered the best information we could, evaluated
the risks involved, and explored a range of possible actions.
At 5:00 a.m., we participated in a conference call with our colleagues at the Board of
Governors and the Treasury to review the options and decide on the way forward. After
careful deliberation, together we decided on a course of action that would at least buy some
time to explore options to mitigate the foreseeable damage to the financial system. With the
support of the Secretary of the Treasury, Chairman Bernanke and the Board of Governors
agreed that the New York Fed would extend an overnight non-recourse loan through the
discount window to JPMorgan Chase, so that JPMorgan Chase could then “on-lend” that
money to Bear Stearns.
This action was designed to allow us to get to the weekend, and to enable us to pursue work
along two tracks: first, for Bear to continue to explore options with other financial institutions
that might enable it to avoid bankruptcy; and second, for policymakers to continue the work
begun on Thursday night to try to contain the risk to financial markets in the event no privatesector solution proved possible.
Over the course of that day, March 14, Bear was downgraded by the credit rating agencies,
and the flight of customer business from Bear accelerated. This set in motion a chain of
decisions across the financial system as market participants prepared for the possibility that
Bear would not be open for business once Asian markets opened on Sunday night. This
highlighted the urgency of working toward a solution over the weekend, ideally a solution that
would definitively address the prospect of default by Bear.
Bear approached several major financial institutions, beginning on March 13. Those
discussions intensified on Friday and Saturday. Bear’s management provided us with
periodic progress reports about a possible merger. Although several different institutions
expressed interest in acquiring all or part of Bear, it was clear that the size of Bear, the
apparent risk in its balance sheet, and the limited amount of time available for a possible
acquirer to conduct due diligence compounded the difficulty. Ultimately, only JPMorgan
Chase was willing to consider an offer of a binding commitment to acquire the firm and to
stand behind Bear’s substantial short-term obligations.
As JPMorgan Chase and other institutions conducted due diligence, my colleagues in New
York and Washington continued to examine ways to contain the effects of a default by Bear.
As part of these discussions, we began to design a new facility that would build on other
liquidity initiatives taken by the Federal Reserve System, and provide a more powerful form
of liquidity to major financial institutions.
Following the announcement on March 11 of the Term Securities Lending Facility, which
allowed primary dealers to pledge a wider range of collateral in order to borrow Treasury

BIS Review 39/2008

5

securities, we had consulted with market participants on how to structure the auctions to
maximize their potential benefits to market functioning. Those discussions yielded a number
of helpful suggestions. In view of those suggestions, and after considering the greater risks
to the financial system posed by the Bear situation, we were able to work quickly on a
companion facility that would transmit liquidity to parts of the market where it could be most
powerful.
This is what led the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to approve the
establishment of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility on March 16. Under Section 13(3) of the
Federal Reserve Act, the Board of Governors is empowered to authorize a Federal Reserve
Bank like the New York Fed to lend to a corporation, such as an investment bank, in
extraordinary circumstances under which there is evidence that the corporation cannot
“secure adequate credit accommodations from other banking institutions.” The Board of
Governors needed to make the statutory finding that the circumstances were exigent and
extraordinary, and it did so, based on the situation prevailing in the financial markets and the
distinct possibility that absent an assurance of liquidity to major investment banks the
deterioration in financial conditions likely would have continued with substantial effects on the
economy.
We recognized, of course, that the use of this legal authority was, in itself, an extraordinary
step. At the same time, we were mindful that Congress included this lending power in the
Federal Reserve Act for a reason, and it seemed irresponsible for us not to use that authority
in this unique situation. Even with an agreement in place that might reduce the probability of
a default by Bear, we decided that independent of that outcome, it was important to get
assured liquidity to primary dealers by Monday morning, to address the accelerating process
of deleveraging and tightening liquidity seen in the financial system.
On Sunday morning, executives at JPMorgan Chase informed us that they had become
significantly more concerned about the scale of the risk that Bear and its many affiliates had
assumed. They were also concerned about the ability of JPMorgan Chase to absorb some of
Bear’s trading portfolio, particularly given the uncertainty ahead about the ultimate scale of
losses facing the financial system. In this context, we began to explore ways in which we
could help facilitate a more orderly solution to the Bear situation. We did not have the
authority to acquire an equity interest in either Bear or JPMorgan Chase, nor were we
prepared to guarantee Bear’s very substantial obligations. And the only feasible option for
buying time would have required open ended financing by the Fed to Bear into an
accelerating withdrawal by Bear’s customers and counterparties.
We did, however, have the ability to lend against collateral, as in the back-to-back nonrecourse arrangement that carried Bear into the weekend. After extensive discussion with my
colleagues at the New York Fed, Chairman Bernanke, and Secretary Paulson, and with their
full support, the New York Fed and JPMorgan Chase reached an agreement in principle that
the New York Fed would assist with non-recourse financing. Using Section 13(3) of the
Federal Reserve Act, the New York Fed agreed in principle to lend $30 billion to JPMorgan
Chase and to secure the lending with a pledge of Bear Stearns assets valued by Bear on
March 14 at approximately $30 billion. This step made it possible for JPMorgan to agree to
acquire Bear and to step in immediately to guarantee all of Bear’s short-term obligations.
This guarantee was especially important to stave off the feared systemic effects that would
be triggered by the panic of a Bear bankruptcy filing and of the failure to honor its obligations.
And by agreeing to lend against a portfolio of securities, we reduced the risk that those
assets would be liquidated quickly, exacerbating already fragile conditions in markets. The
portfolio of securities is described in Annex II to this testimony.
On the evening of Sunday the 16th, I sent a letter to James Dimon, the CEO of JPMorgan
Chase, to memorialize the fact that we had reached a preliminary agreement that the New
York Fed would assist the acquisition with $30 billion in financing, with the understanding that
the parties would continue working during the week towards a formal contract. We also

6

BIS Review 39/20086

provided regulatory approvals, including under Section 23A, to assist with the merger and a
transitional period for phasing in the assets under our capital rules.
The announcement of the agreement between Bear Stearns and JPMorgan Chase and the
announcement of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility were finalized just before Asian markets
opened on Sunday night, and the announcement of these actions helped avert the damage
that would have accompanied default.
On Monday morning, March 17, the $13 billion back-to-back non-recourse loan through
JPMorgan Chase to Bear was repaid to the Fed, with weekend interest of nearly $4 million.
The Primary Dealer Credit Facility was made available to the market. And at the request of
and with the full cooperation of the SEC, examiners from the New York Fed were sent into
the major investment banks to give the Federal Reserve the direct capacity to assess the
financial condition of these institutions.
Discussions were also continuing regarding the details of the Fed’s financial arrangement
with JPMorgan Chase. Our legal teams engaged in the meticulous work of finalizing the legal
structure of the lending arrangement that had been agreed to in principle, including defining
the precise pool of collateral and related hedges that would secure the $30 billion loan.
At the same time, several infirmities became evident in the agreement between JPMorgan
and Bear during the week of March 17th that needed to be cured.
Negotiations between the two sets of counterparties proceeded almost immediately between
the New York Fed and JPMorgan Chase on the one hand, and between JPMorgan Chase
and Bear Stearns on the other. The New York Fed and JPMorgan discussed the details for
the secured financing. Bear Stearns and JPMorgan continued to negotiate changes to the
merger agreement that would tighten the guarantee and provide the necessary certainty that
the merger would be consummated. All the parties shared an overriding common interest: to
move toward a successful merger and avoid the situation in which they found themselves on
March 14.
The extended Easter weekend saw intense sets of bilateral negotiations among the three
parties. The deal, finally struck in the early morning hours on March 24, held benefits for all
parties. That deal included a new, more precise guaranty from JPMorgan, which lifted the
cloud of default risk that had been hanging over the transaction. Bear stockholders were to
receive a higher share price. In addition to fixing the guaranty, JPMorgan gained assurance
that its merger with Bear would take place. And the New York Fed obtained significant
downside protection on the loan and a tighter guaranty on its exposure. The new Fed
financing facility will be in place for a maximum of ten years, though it could be repaid earlier,
at the discretion of the Fed. This is an important feature: the assets that are being pledged as
collateral can be managed on a long-term basis so as to minimize the risks to the market and
the risk of loss. They can be held or disposed of at any time over the next decade. A
summary of Terms and Conditions is attached as Annex III.
In keeping with the traditional role of a lender of last resort, the extensions of credit to Bear
Stearns that the Fed made to facilitate the merger were secured by collateral. The $29 billion
loan will be extended only when and if JPMorgan Chase and Bear merge. We will be
protected from loss by three different risk mitigants: first, a substantial pool of professionallymanaged collateral that, as of March 14, was valued at $30 billion; second, the agreement on
the part of JPMorgan Chase to absorb the first $1 billion of any loss that ultimately occurs in
connection with this arrangement; and third – and perhaps most importantly – a long-term
horizon during which our collateral will be safe-kept and, if sold, will be sold in an orderly
fashion that is not affected by the unnaturally strong downward market pressures that have
been associated with the recent liquidity crisis.
Are there risks here? Yes, but the risks are modest in comparison to the substantial damage
to the economy and economic well-being that potentially would have accompanied Bear’s
insolvency. Congress created the Federal Reserve after the Panic of 1907 with broad

BIS Review 39/2008

7

authority and a range of instruments to assume precisely this type of risk, in support of
overall financial stability and economic growth. Assisting the JPMorgan Chase merger with
Bear was the best option available in the unique circumstances that prevailed at the time.
There are those who have suggested that by intervening to forestall, and ultimately prevent,
a bankruptcy filing by Bear Stearns, the Federal Reserve risks magnifying the chance of
future financial crises, by insulating market participants from the consequences of excessive
risk taking. It is important to recognize that had we not acted we would in effect have
penalized those individuals, companies and financial institutions that had behaved more
prudently, but would have suffered significant damage from the effects of default by a major
institution.
The negative consequences to Bear’s owners and employees from recent events have been
very real – so real that no owner or executive or director of a financial firm would want to be
in Bear Stearns’ position. While we clearly knew that our actions, both in the context of the
JPMorgan Chase transaction and in the establishment of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility
would affect incentives for financial market participants, adding to the risk of “moral hazard,”
we believe that the lesson of the actual outcome for equity holders will serve to check and
even diminish incentives for undue risk-taking.
I believe that the actions taken by the Federal Reserve on a number of fronts in recent
months have reduced some of the risk to the economy that is inherent in this adjustment in
financial markets. By reducing the probability of a systemic financial crisis, the actions taken
by the Fed on and after March 14 have helped avert substantial damage to the economy,
and they have brought a measure of tentative calm to global financial markets. Relative to
the conditions that existed on March 14, risk premia have narrowed, foreign exchange
markets are somewhat more stable, energy and commodity prices are lower, perceptions of
risk in the financial system have diminished, and the flight to quality is less pronounced.
Nevertheless, liquidity conditions in markets are still substantially impaired and the process
of de-leveraging remains underway. And this will amplify the headwinds facing the U.S. and
global economy. In this context, policymakers and financial market participants need to
continue to act forcefully. And their actions need to be proportionate to the challenges.
Financial institutions need to continue to improve the quality of disclosure, and even the
strongest institutions face compelling incentives to raise new equity capital so that they can
take advantage of the opportunities ahead.
Actions to strengthen the capacity of the major government sponsored enterprises, the
Federal Housing Finance Board and the Federal Housing Administration to provide finance
to the mortgage market and help reduce the risk of avoidable foreclosures are a very
important complement to the broader policy actions already in place to contain the downside
risks to the economy.
The Federal Reserve, working closely with other major central banks, will continue to provide
liquidity to markets to help facilitate the process of financial repair.
Looking forward, we face as a nation a number of very important policy questions. This
financial crisis, as all past crises, has highlighted vulnerabilities that require action. No
economy is stronger than its financial system, and as we continue to focus on the immediate
challenges of financial repair and supporting economic growth, we need to begin the process
of building consensus on a comprehensive set of change to our regulatory framework.
In addition to a stronger set of protections for consumers, the overwhelming imperative of
reform must be to put in place a stronger framework for financial stability. Our objective
should be a system that preserves the unique strengths of our financial markets in providing
individuals and entrepreneurs access to capital and credit, but with a greater capacity to
withstand stress.

8

BIS Review 39/20086

This will require significant changes to regulatory policy and the supervisory framework. And
the focus has to be on changing the incentives that all financial market participants face in
managing the risk in exposure to adverse outcomes.
In my view, there are a set of important objectives and principles that should guide this effort.
•

We need to ensure there is a stronger set of shock absorbers, in terms of capital
and liquidity, in those institutions, banks and a limited number of the largest
investment banks, that are critical to market functioning and economic health, with a
stronger form of consolidated supervision over those institutions.

•

We need to substantially simplify and consolidate the regulatory framework, to
reduce the opportunity for regulatory arbitrage, not just in the mortgage market, but
more broadly.

•

We need to make the financial infrastructure more robust, particularly in the
derivatives and repo markets, so that the system can better withstand the effects of
default by a major participant.

•

We need to redesign the set of liquidity facilities that we maintain in normal times,
and in extremis, in the United States and across other major central banks. And
these changes will have to come with a stronger set of incentives and requirements
for the management of liquidity risk by financial institutions with access to central
bank liquidity.

•

And we need to make sure that the Federal Reserve has the mix of authority and
responsibility to respond with adequate speed and force to the prospects of
systemic threats to financial stability.

Conclusion
We look forward to working with the Congress and the Executive Branch to put in place a
system of financial sector oversight and crisis management that works well in the context of a
21st-century financial system.
The actions that we took were intended to protect the economy from the consequences of
risks to the financial system that could have decreased the availability of home mortgage and
other credit, put further downward pressure on home values, eroded retirement savings and
ultimately led to a loss of jobs and incomes as businesses faced added difficulties in
financing expanded operations and job creation.
Policymakers – both in the Federal Reserve and in the federal government – must continue
to be proactive in their response to rapidly changing circumstances.
Finally, I want to express my admiration and appreciation to members of my staff who have
performed with great skill and care under extreme pressure. And I would like to also thank
Chairman Bernanke, Secretary Paulson, Chairman Cox and my many other colleagues in the
Fed and the supervisory community.
Thank you again for giving me the opportunity to appear before you today.

BIS Review 39/2008

9

Timothy F Geithner: Reducing systemic risk in a dynamic financial
system
Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at The Economic Club of New York, New York, 9 June 2008.
*

*

*

Since the summer of 2007, the major financial centers have experienced a very severe and
complex financial crisis. The fabric of confidence that is essential to the viability of individual
institutions and to market functioning in the United States and in Europe proved exceptionally
fragile. Money and funding markets became severely impaired, impeding the effective
transmission of U.S. monetary policy to the economy. Central banks and governments, here
and in other countries, have taken dramatic action to contain the risks to the broader
economy.
Why was the system so fragile?
Part of the explanation was the size of the global financial boom that preceded the crisis. The
larger the boom, the greater the potential risk of damage when it deflates.
The underpinnings of this particular boom include a large increase in savings relative to real
investment opportunities, a long period of low real interest rates around the world, the greater
ease with which capital was able to flow across countries, and the perception of lower real
and inflation risk produced by the greater apparent moderation in output growth and inflation
over the preceding two decades.
This combination of factors put upward pressure on asset prices and narrowed credit
spreads and risk premia, and this in turn encouraged an increase in leverage across the
financial system.
This dynamic both fed and was fed by a wave of financial innovation. As the magnitude of
financial resources seeking higher returns increased around the world, products were
created to meet this demand. Financial innovation made it easier for this money to flow
around the constraints of regulation and to take advantage of more favorable tax and
accounting treatment.
The U.S. financial system created a lot of lower quality mortgage securities, many of which
were packaged together with other securities into complex structured products and sold to
institutions around the world. Many of these securities and products were held in leveraged
money or capital market vehicles, and financed with substantial liquidity risk. And yet, by
historical standards, the overall level of risk premia in financial markets remained
extraordinarily low over this period.
The structure of the financial system changed fundamentally during the boom, with dramatic
growth in the share of assets outside the traditional banking system. This non-bank financial
system grew to be very large, particularly in money and funding markets. In early 2007,
asset-backed commercial paper conduits, in structured investment vehicles, in auction-rate
preferred securities, tender option bonds and variable rate demand notes, had a combined
asset size of roughly $2.2 trillion. Assets financed overnight in triparty repo grew to $2.5
trillion. Assets held in hedge funds grew to roughly $1.8 trillion. The combined balance
sheets of the then five major investment banks totaled $4 trillion.
In comparison, the total assets of the top five bank holding companies in the United States at
that point were just over $6 trillion, and total assets of the entire banking system were about
$10 trillion.
This parallel system financed some of these very assets on a very short-term basis in the
bilateral or triparty repo markets. As the volume of activity in repo markets grew, the variety

BIS Review 74/2008

1

of assets financed in this manner expanded beyond the most highly liquid securities to
include less liquid securities, as well. Nonetheless, these assets were assumed to be readily
sellable at fair values, in part because assets with similar credit ratings had generally been
tradable during past periods of financial stress. And the liquidity supporting them was
assumed to be continuous and essentially frictionless, because it had been so for a long
time.
The scale of long-term risky and relatively illiquid assets financed by very short-term liabilities
made many of the vehicles and institutions in this parallel financial system vulnerable to a
classic type of run, but without the protections such as deposit insurance that the banking
system has in place to reduce such risks. Once the investors in these financing
arrangements – many conservatively managed money funds – withdrew or threatened to
withdraw their funds from these markets, the system became vulnerable to a self-reinforcing
cycle of forced liquidation of assets, which further increased volatility and lowered prices
across a variety of asset classes. In response, margin requirements were increased, or
financing was withdrawn altogether from some customers, forcing more de-leveraging.
Capital cushions eroded as assets were sold into distressed markets. The force of this
dynamic was exacerbated by the poor quality of assets – particularly mortgage-related
assets – that had been spread across the system. This helps explain how a relatively small
quantity of risky assets was able to undermine the confidence of investors and other market
participants across a much broader range of assets and markets.
Banks could not fully absorb and offset the effects of the pullback in investor participation –
or the "run" – on this non-bank system, in part because they themselves had sponsored
many of these off-balance-sheet vehicles. They had written very large contingent
commitments to provide liquidity support to many of the funding vehicles that were under
pressure. They had retained substantial economic exposure to the risk of a deterioration in
house prices and to a broader economic downturn, and as a result, many suffered a sharp
increase in their cost of borrowing.
The funding and balance sheet pressures on banks were intensified by the rapid breakdown
of securitization and structured finance markets. Banks lost the capacity to move riskier
assets off their balance sheets, at the same time they had to fund, or to prepare to fund, a
range of contingent commitments over an uncertain time horizon.
The combined effect of these factors was a financial system vulnerable to self-reinforcing
asset price and credit cycles. The system appeared to be more stable across a broader
range of circumstances and better able to withstand the effects of moderate stress, but it had
become more vulnerable to more extreme events. And the change in the structure of the
system made the crisis more difficult to manage with the traditional mix of instruments
available to central banks and governments.
First repair, then reform
What should be done to reduce these vulnerabilities?
Our first and most immediate priority remains to help the economy and the financial system
get through this crisis.
A range of different measures of liquidity premia and credit risk premia have eased
somewhat relative to the adverse peaks of mid-March.
Part of this improvement – this modest and tentative improvement – is the result of the range
of policy actions by the Federal Reserve System, the U.S. Treasury and other central banks.
Part is the consequence of the substantial adjustments already undertaken by financial
institutions to reduce risk, raise capital and build liquidity.
These actions by institutions and by the official sector have helped to reduce the risk of a
deeper downturn in economic activity and of a systemic financial crisis.

2

BIS Review 74/2008

But the U.S. economy and economies worldwide are still in the process of adjusting to the
aftermath of rapid asset price growth and unsustainably low risk premiums. This process will
take time.
As we continue to work with other central banks to ease the adjustment now under way in
the U.S. economy and globally, we are working to make the financial system more resilient
and to improve its capacity to deal with future crises.
We are working closely with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), with banking
supervisors in the United States and the other major economies, and with the U.S. Treasury
to strengthen the financial foundation of the major investment and commercial banks. We
have encouraged a significant increase in the quality of public disclosure. We have
supported efforts that have brought a very substantial amount of new equity capital into many
financial institutions. These efforts will help mitigate the risk of a deeper credit crunch. And
even as the Federal Reserve has worked to mitigate the liquidity pressures in markets by
implementing a new set of lending facilities, we have worked with the SEC and others to
ensure that the major institutions are strengthening their liquidity positions and funding
strategies.
We are also initiating important steps to strengthen the financial infrastructure. We are in the
process of encouraging a substantial increase in the resources held against the risk of
default by a major market participant across the set of private sector and cooperative
arrangements for funding, trading, clearing and settlement of financial transactions that form
the "centralized infrastructure" of the financial system. We have begun to review how to
reduce the vulnerability of secured lending markets, including triparty repo by reducing, in
part, the scale of potentially illiquid assets financed at very short maturities.
This afternoon, 17 firms that represent more than 90 percent of credit derivatives trading,
meet at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with their primary U.S. and international
supervisors to outline a comprehensive set of changes to the derivatives infrastructure. This
agenda includes:
•

the establishment of a central clearing house for credit default swaps,

•

a program to reduce the level of outstanding contracts through bilateral and
multilateral netting,

•

the incorporation of a protocol for managing defaults into existing and future credit
derivatives contracts, and

•

concrete targets for achieving substantially greater automation of trading and
settlement.

These changes to the infrastructure will help improve the system's ability to manage the
consequences of failure by a major institution. Making these changes will take time, but we
expect to make meaningful progress over the next six months.
The set of ongoing and near-term initiatives I just outlined are only the beginning and should
be considered a bridge to a broader set of necessary changes to the regulatory framework in
the United States and globally.
I believe the severity and complexity of this crisis makes a compelling case for a
comprehensive reassessment of how to use regulation to strike an appropriate balance
between efficiency and stability. This is exceptionally complicated, both in terms of the tradeoffs involved and in building the necessary consensus in the United States and the world. It
is going to require significant changes to the way we regulate and supervise financial
institutions, changes that go well beyond adjustments to some of the specific capital charges
in the existing capital requirement regime for banks.
We have to recognize, however, that poorly designed regulation has the potential to make
things worse. We have to distinguish carefully between problems the markets will solve on

BIS Review 74/2008

3

their own and those markets cannot solve. We have to acknowledge not just that regulation
comes with costs, but that if not carefully crafted it can distort incentives in ways that may
make the system less safe. And we have to focus on ways regulation can mitigate the moral
hazard risk created by the actions central banks and governments have taken and may take
in the future to avert systemic financial crises.
I am going outline some broad proposals for reform, focusing on the aspects of our system
that are most important to reducing systemic risk. These proposals do not address a myriad
of other important aspects of regulatory policy, including consumer protection issues in the
mortgage origination business, the future role of government and government-sponsored
enterprises in our housing markets, and many others.
Any agenda for reform has to deal with three important dimensions of the regulatory system.
•

Regulatory policy. These are the incentives and constraints designed to affect the
level and concentration of risk-taking across the financial system. You can think of
these as a financial analog to imposing speed limits and requiring air bags and
antilock brakes in cars, or establishing building codes in earthquake zones.

•

Regulatory structure. This is about who is responsible for setting and enforcing
those rules.

•

Crisis management. This is about when and how we intervene and about the
expectations we create for official intervention in crises.

Here are a few broad points on each of these.
Regulatory policy
The objectives of regulatory policy should be to improve the capacity of the financial system
to withstand the effects of failure and to reduce the overall vulnerability of the system to the
type of funding runs and margin spirals we have seen in this crisis.
First, this means looking beyond prudential supervision of the critical institutions to broader
oversight of market practices and the market infrastructure that are important to market
functioning. Two obvious examples: we need to make it much more difficult for institutions
with little capital and little supervision to underwrite mortgages, and we need to look more
comprehensively how to improve the incentives for institutions that structure and sell assetbacked securities and CDOs of ABS. And supervision will have to focus more attention on
the extent of maturity transformation taking place outside the banking system.
Second, risk-management practices and supervisory oversight has to focus much more
attention on strengthening shock absorbers within institutions and across the infrastructure
against very bad macroeconomic and financial outcomes, however implausible they may
seem in good times. After we get through this crisis and the process of stabilization and
financial repair is complete, we will put in place more exacting expectations on capital,
liquidity and risk management for the largest institutions that play a central role in
intermediation and market functioning.
This is important for reasons that go beyond the implications of excess leverage for the fate
of any particular financial institution. As we have seen, the process of de-leveraging by large
but relatively strong institutions can cause significant collateral damage for market
functioning and for other financial institutions.
Inducing institutions to hold stronger cushions of capital and liquidity in periods of calm may
be the best way to reduce the amplitude of financial shocks on the way up, and to contain the
damage on the way down. Stronger initial cushions against stress reduces the need to hedge
risk dynamically in a crisis, reducing the broader risk of a self-reinforcing, pro-cyclical margin
spiral, such as we have seen in this crisis.

4

BIS Review 74/2008

How should we decide where to set these constraints on risk-taking? This is hard, but the
objective should be to offset the benefits and the moral hazard risk that come from access to
central bank liquidity in crises, without setting the constraint at a level that will only result in
pushing more capital to the unregulated part of the financial system.
Risk management and oversight now focuses too much on the idiosyncratic risk that affects
an individual firm and too little on the systematic issues that could affect market liquidity as a
whole. To put it somewhat differently, the conventional risk-management framework today
focuses too much on the threat to a firm from its own mistakes and too little on the potential
for mistakes to be correlated across firms. It is too confident that a firm can adjust to protect
itself from its own mistakes without adding to downward pressure on markets and takes too
little account of the risk of a flight to safety – a broad-based, marketwide rush for the exits as
the financial system as a whole de-leverages and tries collectively to move into more liquid
and lower risk assets of government obligations.
Third, although supervision has to focus first on the stability of the core of financial
institutions, it cannot be indifferent to the scale of leverage and risk outside the regulated
institutions.
I do not believe it would be desirable or feasible to extend capital requirements to institutions
such as hedge funds or private equity firms. But supervision has to ensure that counterpartycredit risk management in the regulated institutions contains the level of overall exposure of
the regulated to the unregulated. Prudent counterparty risk management, in turn, will work to
limit the risk of a rise in overall leverage outside the regulated institutions that could threaten
the stability of the financial system.
Supervision has to explicitly focus on inducing higher levels of margin and collateral in
normal times against derivatives and secured borrowing to better cover the risk of market
illiquidity. Greater product standardization and improved disclosure can also help, as will
changes to the accounting rules that govern what risks reside on and off balance sheets.
Finally, central banks, governments and supervisors have to look much more carefully at the
interaction between accounting, tax, disclosure and capital requirements, and their effects on
overall leverage and risk across the financial system. Capital requirements alone are rarely
the most important constraint.
The President's Working Group on Financial Markets and the Financial Stability Forum has
laid out a very detailed list of reforms to begin this process. And we are fortunate to have
Jerry Corrigan engaged in working to shape a set of recommendations to help us get the
balance right.
Regulatory structure
Apart from the mix of incentives and constraints set by regulatory policy, the structure of the
regulatory system in the United States needs substantial reform. Our current system has
evolved into a confusing mix of diffused accountability, regulatory competition, an
enormously complex web of rules that create perverse incentives and leave huge
opportunities for arbitrage and evasion, and creates the risk of large gaps in our knowledge
and authority.
This crisis gives us the opportunity to bring about fundamental change in the direction of a
more streamlined and consolidated system with more clarity around responsibility for the
prudential safeguards in the system. In this regard, Secretary Paulson's blueprint outlines a
sweeping consolidation and realignment of responsibilities, with a clear set of objectives for
achieving a better balance between efficiency and stability, between market discipline and
regulation. This proposal has stimulated a very constructive set of discussions, and will help
lay the foundation for action when the dust settles.

BIS Review 74/2008

5

The most fundamental reform that is necessary is for all institutions that play a central role in
money and funding markets – including the major globally active banks and investment
banks – to operate under a unified framework that provides a stronger form of consolidated
supervision, with appropriate requirements for capital and liquidity.
To complement this, we need to put in place a stronger framework of oversight authority over
the critical parts of the payments system, not just the centralized payments, clearing and
settlements systems but the infrastructure that underpins the decentralized over-the-counter
markets.
The Federal Reserve should play a central role in this framework, working closely with
supervisors here and in other countries. At present the Federal Reserve has broad
responsibility for financial stability not matched by direct authority, and the consequences of
the actions we have taken in this crisis make it more important that we close that gap.
Crisis management
No financial system will be free from crises, whatever the design of the regulatory framework
or the rules of the game. The framework of lender-of-last-resort policies and the regime for
facilitating an orderly resolution of a major non-bank financial institution are critical to our
ability to contain financial crises.
In response to this crisis, the Federal Reserve has designed and implemented a number of
innovative new facilities for injecting liquidity into the markets. These facilities have played a
significant role in easing liquidity strains in markets and we plan to leave them in place until
conditions in money and credit markets have improved substantially.
We are also examining what suite of liquidity facilities will be appropriate in the future, with
what conditions for access and what oversight requirements to mitigate moral hazard risk.
Some of the mechanisms we have employed during this crisis may become permanent parts
of our toolkit. Some might be best reserved for the type of acute market illiquidity
experienced in this crisis.
It would be helpful for the Federal Reserve System to have greater flexibility to respond to
acute liquidity pressure in markets without undermining its capacity to manage the federal
funds rates at the FOMC's (Federal Open Market Committee) target. The authority Congress
has granted the Fed to pay interest on reserves beginning in 2011 will be very helpful in this
regard. We welcome the fact that Congress is now considering accelerating that authority.
The major central banks should put in place a standing network of currency swaps, collateral
policies and account arrangements that would make it easier to mobilize liquidity across
borders quickly in crisis. We have some of the elements of this framework in place today,
and these arrangements have worked relatively well in the present crises. We should leave
them in place, refine them further and test them frequently.
The Federal Reserve Act gives us very broad authority to lend in crises. We used that
authority in new and consequential ways, but in the classic tradition of central banks and
lenders of last resort. As we broadened the range of collateral we were willing to finance,
extended the terms of our lending and provided liquidity insurance to primary dealers, our
actions were carefully calibrated to improve overall market functioning by providing an
effective liquidity backstop and to avoid supplanting either the interbank market or the
secured funding market.
In addition to these new facilities, the Fed made the judgment, after very careful
consideration, that it was necessary to use its emergency powers to protect the financial
system and the economy from a systemic crisis by committing to facilitate the merger
between JPMorgan Chase and Bear Stearns. We did this with great reluctance, and only
because it was the only feasible option available to avert default, and because we did not
believe we had the ability to contain the damage that would have been caused by default.

6

BIS Review 74/2008

Our actions were guided by the same general principles that have governed Fed action in
crises over the years. There was an acute risk to the stability of the system; we were not
confident that the damage could be contained through other means; we acted only to help
facilitate an orderly resolution, not to preserve the institution itself; and the management of
the firm and the equity holders of the institution involved suffered very substantial
consequences.
Although we assumed some risk in this transaction, that risk is modest in comparison to the
risk of very substantial damage to the financial system and the economy as a whole that
would have accompanied default.
Conclusion
One of the central objectives in reforming our regulatory framework should be to mitigate the
fragility of the system and to reduce the need for official intervention in the future. I know that
many hope and believe that we could design our system so that supervisors would have the
ability to act preemptively to diffuse pockets of risk and leverage. I do not believe that is a
desirable or realistic ambition for policy. It would fail, and the attempt would entail a level of
regulation and uncertainty about the rules of the game that would offset any possible benefit.
I do believe, however, that we can make the system better able to handle failure by making
the shock absorbers stronger.
This crisis exposed very significant problems in the financial systems of the United States
and some other major economies. Innovation got too far out in front of the knowledge of risk.
It is very important that we move quickly to adapt the regulatory system to address the
vulnerabilities exposed by this financial crisis. With the leadership of the Secretary of the
Treasury, Hank Paulson, we are beginning the process of building the necessary consensus
here and with the other major financial centers.
Let me just finish by saying that confidence in any financial system depends in part on
confidence in the individuals running the largest private institutions. Regulation cannot
produce integrity, foresight or judgment in those responsible for managing these institutions.
That's up to the boards and shareholders of those institutions.
One of the great strengths of our system is the speed with which we adapt to challenge. We
can do better, and I am reasonably confident we will.
Thank you.

BIS Review 74/2008

7

Timothy F Geithner: Systemic risk and financial markets
Testimony of Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of
Representatives, Washington DC, 24 July 2008.
*

*

*

Good morning, Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus and other members of the
Committee. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify today.
I very much welcome the opportunity to appear before you with Chairman Cox of the
Securities and Exchange Committee (SEC). The Federal Reserve and the SEC are working
very closely together in navigating through the present challenges, and my colleagues at the
Fed and I very much appreciate his, and his colleagues’, support and cooperation.
The U.S. and global financial systems are going through a very challenging period of
adjustment. The critical imperative today is to help facilitate that adjustment and to cushion
its impact on the broader economy. The forces that made the system vulnerable to this crisis
took a long time to build up, and the system will need some time to work through their
aftermath.
Looking forward, the United States will have to undertake substantial reforms to the
framework of policy, regulation and oversight of the financial system. There was a case for
reform before this crisis. The regulatory framework in the United States was designed in a
different time for a very different type of financial system than the one we have today.
Nonetheless, many observers believed that this framework, although messy and complex,
worked reasonably well. It is harder to make that case today.
The financial system plays a vital role in long-term economic growth by helping to efficiently
allocate the resources of savers to those individuals and firms with ideas and the capacity to
put those ideas into action. And the financial system plays a critical role in economic stability
by affecting the capacity of the real economy to withstand shocks and the ability of
macroeconomic policy to mitigate the impact of those shocks.
The challenge is in achieving the right balance between efficiency and resilience, between
innovation and stability. Our financial system has many strengths, and we need to examine
ways to build on those while making the system more resilient to future shocks. Achieving
this balance will involve a very complicated set of policy choices. Until we get through this
crisis, it will be hard to make definitive judgments about the appropriate scope and nature of
the changes that will be necessary.
Any reform must offer the prospect of a substantial improvement in outcomes relative to
potential costs. And those trade-offs will have to be evaluated against, among other things,
the potential distortions created by differential treatment across regulated and unregulated
entities, the magnitude of the tax imposed on the overall level of financial intermediation, and
the extent of the safety net and the potential for moral hazard.
I would like to offer some observations, from my perspective at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, on some of the broad considerations that should guide this process.
Changes to the structure of the U.S. financial system
It is useful to start with a brief review of the changes in the structure of the financial system
that should motivate reform.
Our system was once organized around banks—defined narrowly as institutions that take
deposits and make loans. Over time there has been a gradual but pronounced decline in the

BIS Review 95/2008

1

share of financial assets originated and held by banks, and a corresponding increase in the
share of financial assets held across a variety of non-bank financial institutions, funds and
complex financial structures.
The lines between banks, investment banks and other institutions have eroded over time, as
have the lines between institutions and markets. Loans made by both banks and non-banks
were increasingly sold by the originating institution and packaged into securities. And these
securities were repackaged into even more complex instruments and products, many of
which resided off the balance sheets of the major financial institutions.
Innovations in credit derivatives over this period made it easier to trade and hedge credit risk.
Access to credit was extended on a dramatic scale to less creditworthy borrowers, without a
commensurate increase in the risk premiums on the securities that embedded this more risky
credit. Risk accumulated in institutions that operated at the margin of the explicit safety net,
such as mortgage affiliates of thrifts, structured investment vehicles and the GSEs.
These changes within U.S. financial markets were complemented by a rise in global financial
integration as technology and deregulation made it easier for savings to flow across
international borders.
As a consequence of this basic evolution of our financial system, a large share of financial
assets ended up in institutions and vehicles with substantial leverage, and in many cases
these assets were being funded with short-term obligations. And just as banks are vulnerable
to a sudden withdrawal of deposits, these non-banks and funding vehicles are vulnerable to
an erosion in market liquidity when confidence deteriorates and concerns about default risk
increase.
These changes in the structure of the financial system were probably not the only causes of
the financial boom that preceded this crisis, but they may have amplified the dimension of the
boom and they were important to how the crisis unfolded and to how policy has responded.
In many respects, financial innovation over this period outpaced the system’s capacity to
measure and limit risk, to manage the incentive problems in the securitization process and to
provide for an appropriate degree of transparency through meaningful disclosure. Once the
performance of the underlying assets began to deteriorate, these weaknesses in the system
magnified the uncertainty about the scale of potential losses and added to the intensity of
pressures that accompanied the crisis.
The growth in leverage and liquidity risk outside of banks made the system vulnerable to a
sharp erosion in liquidity, but without the protections established to limit the risk of classic
bank runs. The large share of financial assets held in institutions without direct access to the
Fed’s traditional lending facilities complicated the ability of our traditional policy instruments
to contain the damage to the financial system and the economy.
This crisis provides a stark illustration of how hard it is for a supervisory and regulatory
framework designed principally around banks to contain the impact of financial shocks in a
manner that mitigates the risks to the broader economy.
Elements of reform
What broad principles and objectives should guide reform?
I would like to outline some of the key elements of a stronger framework of regulation and
oversight, and identify some of the harder questions we will need to answer to implement this
framework. These questions are more fundamental than questions of the allocation of
responsibility across supervisors, market regulators and central banks and thus must be
resolved before turning to those questions. I focus here on the issues related to financial
stability, and do not try to address the equally important areas of consumer and investor
protection, market integrity or the role of the government-sponsored entities in housing.

2

BIS Review 95/2008

I believe the most important imperative is to build a financial system that is more robust to
very bad outcomes and more resilient to shocks. This means (1) a system in which the major
institutions are less vulnerable to shocks; (2) a system that is less vulnerable to margin
spirals and a generalized pull-back in liquidity and funding; and (3) a system that is more
able to withstand the effects of failure of a major financial institution.
Looking past the immediate crisis, a more resilient system must be built on stronger and
better designed shock absorbers, both in the major institutions and in the infrastructure of the
financial system.
At the level of the financial institution, the key financial shock absorbers are capital and
reserves, margin and collateral, liquidity, and the risk management and control regime.
Financial stability starts with ensuring that individual institutions in periods of expansion and
relative stability hold adequate resources against the losses and liquidity pressures that can
emerge in economic contraction or instability.
For the infrastructure of the financial system, these shock absorbers include the resources
held against the risk of default by a major market participant across the set of private sector
and cooperative arrangements for the funding, trading, clearing and settlement of financial
transactions.
Simplifying and consolidating the regulatory architecture will be instrumental to these efforts
by establishing a common framework of rules, clear responsibility and authority, and by
reducing opportunities for arbitrage. Through close coordination across central banks,
supervisors and market regulators, we need to adopt an integrated approach to the design
and enforcement of capital standards and other prudential regulations critical to systemic
stability. In this context, prudential supervisors, working with those responsible for setting
accounting standards and capital market regulations, need to systematically examine the
interaction among capital, accounting, tax and disclosure requirements to assess their effects
on the overall levels of leverage and risk across the financial system.
As we change the framework of regulation and oversight, we need to find ways to strengthen
market discipline over financial institutions, and to limit the moral hazard that is present in a
range of different forms in any regulated financial system.
The liquidity tools of central banks and the emergency powers of other public authorities
were created in recognition of the fact that individual institutions, including those central to
payments and funding mechanisms, cannot protect themselves fully from an abrupt
evaporation of access to liquidity or ability to liquidate assets. The existence of these tools
and their use in crises, however appropriate, creates moral hazard by encouraging market
participants to engage in riskier behavior than they would have in the absence of the central
bank’s backstop. To mitigate this effect on risk-taking, strong supervisory authority is
required over the consolidated financial entities that are critical to a well-functioning financial
system.
A more resilient financial system will also require a framework for dealing with the failure of
financial institutions. For entities that take deposits, we have a formal resolution framework in
place. As Secretary of the Treasury Henry M. Paulson, Jr., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben
S. Bernanke and others have stated, we need a companion framework for facilitating the
orderly unwinding of other types of regulated financial institutions where failure may pose
risks to the stability of the financial system.
The elements I just outlined need to be accompanied by a clearer structure of responsibility
and authority over the payments system. Payment and settlement systems and central
counterparties play a critical role in financial stability. Our current system is overseen by a
patchwork of authorities, with responsibilities diffused across several agencies in a manner
that leaves significant gaps. We need a more formal and integrated framework of oversight,
one that establishes and enforces standards and continuously monitors the conditions in
these markets.

BIS Review 95/2008

3

And finally, as we adapt the U.S. framework, we have to work to bring about a consensus
among the major economies on a complementary global framework. Given the level of
financial integration globally, we cannot achieve a reasonable balance at home between
efficiency and stability, without a complementary framework of supervision and regulation
across the other major financial centers.
To make it operational, the framework I just laid out will require a complicated set of choices.
•

What level of conservatism should be built into future prudential regulations over
capital and liquidity?

•

Which types of institutions should be subject to these requirements?

•

Can direct regulation over a limited set of institutions effectively protect the system
from distress among the unregulated?

•

How should responsibility for different dimensions of financial regulation be
allocated, and how centralized or decentralized?

•

What institutions should have access to central bank liquidity under what
conditions?

The role of the Federal Reserve
The Congress gave the Federal Reserve broad authority to address risks to financial
stability. Because the financial landscape has changed so substantially, many observers
have pointed out the need to revisit the scope and nature of Federal Reserve’s authority.
Secretary Paulson has outlined a number of important proposals for reform, many of which
would broaden the responsibility and the authority of the Federal Reserve. I want to identify
some issues that are critical to our current responsibilities and will be important in defining an
appropriate role in the future, with the most effective mix of responsibility and authority.
There is more continuity than change in these suggestions, and they assume, as is the case
today, that we will have to work closely with other functional supervisors to make the system
work.
First, the Fed has a very important role today, working in cooperation with bank supervisors
and the SEC, in establishing the capital and other prudential safeguards that are applied on a
consolidated basis to the institutions that are critical to the proper functioning of financial
markets.
Second, the Fed, as the financial system’s lender of last resort, should play an important role
in the consolidated supervision of those institutions that have access to central bank liquidity
and play a critical role in market functioning. Our ability to directly oversee the risk profile of
these institutions is essential to our capacity to make the judgments necessary for using our
lender of last resort tools, including critical judgments about liquidity and solvency for
individual institutions and for the system as a whole. Those judgments require the knowledge
that can only come from a direct, established role in supervision. And replacing our ongoing
role as consolidated supervisor with stand-by, contingent authority to intervene would risk
exacerbating moral hazard and adding to uncertainty about the rules of the game.
Third, the Federal Reserve should be granted explicit responsibility and clear authority over
systemically important payment and settlement systems, and the ability to continue to
encourage broader improvements in the over-the-counter derivatives markets.
Fourth, the Federal Reserve Board should have an important consultative role in judgments
about official intervention where there is potential for systemic risk, as is currently the case
for bank resolutions under FDICIA.
And, finally, the responsibilities for market and financial stability that are accorded the Fed in
current and any future legislation will require that the Fed adopt a more comprehensive

4

BIS Review 95/2008

approach to financial supervision and market oversight. Given the changes in the structure of
the financial system, maintaining financial stability requires us to look beyond just the stability
of individual banks. It requires us to look at market developments more broadly, at the
infrastructure that is critical to market functioning, and at the role played by other leveraged
financial institutions.
Over the past four years, the Federal Reserve has led a number of initiatives with our
supervisory colleagues in the United States and in the other major financial centers to
improve the OTC derivatives infrastructure, to strengthen the systemically important payment
and settlement systems, to improve counterparty risk-management practices with respect to
hedge funds, and to place greater emphasis on ensuring robustness to low probability, high
severity instances of stress. This forward-looking, cross-institution approach, integrating
prudential supervision with market oversight and payment system expertise, offers the best
model of broad financial oversight focused on systemic risk.
I want to emphasize in conclusion that we are working now, in close cooperation with the
SEC, other U.S. bank supervisors, our international counterparts and market participants to
improve the capacity of the financial system to withstand stress. These initiatives include joint
efforts with the SEC to bolster consolidated oversight of the investment banks, formalized in
our recent Memorandum of Understanding. These institutions have made substantial
changes over the past several months to bring down overall leverage and risk-weighted
assets and to reduce liquidity risk. In addition, we have undertaken a broad based program
of initiatives to build a more robust over-the-counter derivatives infrastructure through,
among other measures, a central clearing house for credit default swaps; to strengthen the
financial cushions held by central counterparties against the risk of default by a participant;
and to reduce vulnerabilities in secured funding markets.
These initiatives will take time, but we expect to see substantial progress over the next two
quarters.
I look forward to your questions today and working with you as we move ahead in building a
more effective financial regulatory framework for the United States.
Thank you.

BIS Review 95/2008

5

William C Dudley: The case for TIPS – an examination of the costs and
benefits
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Inflation-Indexed
Securities and Inflation Risk Management Conference, New York, 10 February 2009.
*

*

*

Welcome to the New York Fed and to this timely conference on inflation-indexed securities
and inflation risk management. Before discussing "The Case for TIPS", I would like to thank
conference organizers, participants, panelists and supporting Bank staff for planning and
putting together today's event.
In particular, I wanted to thank John Campbell for his contribution to making today's
conference a reality and I expect that his involvement will heighten attention to this subject
and stimulate additional research from the academic community on the topics we discuss
here.
Over the past year, Treasury has been evaluating the costs and benefits of the TIPS
program. Some research studies on this topic have concluded that the incremental financing
costs associated with the TIPS program have been substantial; leading some to conclude
that the costs may outweigh the benefits. Today’s program, which includes a panel
discussion on the welfare benefits of inflation-protected securities, should help to broaden
our knowledge on this topic.
As the title of my speech suggests, today I am going to lay out the reasons why I, along with
my colleagues Jennifer Roush and Michelle Steinberg Ezer, believe that the benefits of the
TIPS program exceed the costs of the program.
Before saying anything more, let me emphasize that the views I express today are my own
and those of my co-authors and, therefore, may not represent the views of my colleagues on
the Federal Open Market Committee. Also, let me note that Jennifer and Michelle are the
main authors of this paper. I have ridden along on their coattails. My main contribution was to
slow down completion as I had to fit in my very modest contributions around the unfolding
financial crisis! Finally, you may be wondering why this is my first speech since I have
become president – an odd subject to choose, perhaps, given the ongoing financial crisis?
The answer is a simple one, our paper and this conference have been in train for a long time.
It is just a coincidence that the conference and my becoming president of the New York Fed
have happened to arrive at about the same time.
The logic of issuing inflation-protected securities is straightforward. Wouldn’t some investors
pay a premium – that is, accept a lower expected return – in exchange for guaranteed, full
compensation for inflation? Because the United States and a number of other countries
decided that the answer was likely to be “yes,” they developed an inflation-indexed
government debt market.
Has the program been a good development from the perspective of the U.S. Treasury? What
about from the public’s perspective?
A good starting point for answering these questions is to account for the costs and benefits of
the program relative to an appropriate counterfactual. For example, we might start by
comparing the difference in funding costs to the Treasury of TIPS versus a program of
comparable duration nominal Treasuries.
But we should also be careful not to ignore other potential benefits of the TIPS program. As
we see it, these potential benefits include:

BIS Review 14/2009

1

•

the provision of a virtually risk-free investment that provides value to risk-averse
investors,

•

access to a market-determined measure of inflation expectations that can help
inform the conduct of monetary policy,

•

greater diversification of the Treasury’s funding sources, which presumably has
favorable implications for the Treasury’s overall funding costs, and

•

the potential for TIPS issuance to reduce the variability of the U.S. government’s net
financial position and provide an explicit incentive for the fiscal authorities to conduct
policy with an eye toward the consequences of inflation.

Although it is difficult to quantify these benefits, we argue that they are meaningful and
should not be ignored in evaluating the benefits of the TIPS program.
Turning first to the issue of measuring the impact of TIPS issuance on the government’s
funding costs, this could be done simply by comparing the ex-post costs of a program of
TIPS issuance to the costs of a comparable program of nominal Treasury issuance. Studies 1
of this sort have typically shown that TIPS issuance has resulted in a higher net cost to the
Treasury. Unfortunately, although this methodology is attractive in its simplicity, it has some
flaws that undercut its usefulness in reaching conclusions about the attractiveness of the
TIPS program.
The problem with an ex-post analysis is that it depends critically upon the performance of
inflation over the period in question. If inflation turns out to have been meaningfully different
than what was expected at the time of TIPS issuance, then this difference – the so-called
“inflation surprise” – can be important in affecting the relative costs of TIPS versus nominal
Treasury issuance. If inflation turns out to be higher than expected, then TIPS issuance will
likely look to have been more expensive than nominal Treasury issuance. If inflation turns out
lower, an ex-post analysis will likely show a savings from the TIPS program.
Over the long run – and I mean the very long run – there should be roughly as many
downward surprises in inflation performance as upward surprises. But within any relatively
short period, such as the last decade, this certainly does not need to be the case. In other
words, over such a short period, the outcome of an ex-post analysis can be heavily
influenced by which of the two sides – the Treasury or investors – was the lucky recipient of
the net inflation surprise that occurred over the period in question. For example, in countries
such as the United Kingdom, where inflation declined following the inception of an inflationlinked debt program, ex-post studies generally suggest that these programs have reduced
financing costs for these countries.
The fact that the Treasury saved or lost money ex-post is thus not a very reliable guide as to
whether the strategic decision to implement a TIPS program has been a good idea. The
relevant question is whether the Treasury obtained the financing it needed at a lower ex-ante
cost. If the experiment were to be run thousands of times drawing from the underlying
distribution of possible inflation outcomes, would Treasury’s costs have been lower, on
average, with TIPS or with nominal Treasuries? To conclude on the basis of one coin flip or
roll of the dice as ex-post analysis essentially does surely is not the best way to evaluate the
respective costs of TIPS issuance versus nominal Treasuries.
Thus, we need to focus on the underlying factors that determine the ex-ante difference in
costs.

1

2

See Sack and Elsasser (2004), Roush (2008).

BIS Review 14/2009

There are two primary factors 2 underlying the relative cost differences:
1)

the compensation investors require to hold a security that is less liquid than its
nominal counterpart, termed the illiquidity premium, and

2)

the insurance value they attach to obtaining protection against inflation risk, known
as the inflation risk premium.

With regard to the first factor, when investors are worried about their ability to resell TIPS in a
liquid secondary market, they require compensation for holding the securities compared with
more liquid alternatives. This illiquidity premium tends to drive up TIPS yields and increase
the Treasury’s borrowing costs.
The second factor works in the opposite direction. To the extent that investors are willing to
pay for inflation protection, they would purchase TIPS at a price above that implied by their
expected payment stream. As such, inflation risk premiums result in lower expected
borrowing costs for the government and savings for the TIPS program compared with
nominal issuance.
To determine which factor has been historically dominant, we conduct an ex-ante cost
analysis: We compare the amount that the Treasury received for inflation compensation at
auction with an observable measure of the inflation expectations of TIPS investors that is not
contaminated by premiums for inflation risk or liquidity differentials. Unfortunately, we don’t
have a perfect measure of expected inflation. Nevertheless, we may be able to get close. We
do have estimates of expected inflation from other sources – such as the Survey of
Professional Forecasters (SPF) conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. If
such measures do indeed reflect the inflation expectations of investors, then we can conduct
a reasonably accurate ex-ante analysis.
TIPS analysts often talk about a concept they call the breakeven inflation rate. Essentially,
this is the realized inflation rate that would cause investors to come out the same in terms of
total compensation regardless of whether they had bought TIPS or nominal Treasuries.
The difference between the auction breakeven inflation rate and the SPF forecast yields a
measure of the net savings or loss incurred by the Treasury that is independent of forecast
errors. It is also equal to the net value of the illiquidity and inflation risk premiums associated
with each TIPS. Our analysis, which covers TIPS auctions through April 2008, found that
prior to 2004, the breakeven inflation rate was below the SPF. This indicates that the
illiquidity premiums exceeded the inflation risk premium over this period. However, since
2004, we find that breakeven inflation rates were approximately equal to expected inflation,
indicating that investors were roughly indifferent between the benefit of being protected
against inflation risk versus the cost in terms of the greater illiquidity of TIPS relative to onthe-run nominal Treasuries. Thus, on an ex-ante basis, it appeared that the cost of issuing
TIPS was about equal to the cost of issuing nominal Treasuries.
To determine the impact of the illiquidity premium and inflation risk premium on these results,
we decomposed our ex-ante analysis, comparing the breakeven rate of inflation excluding
the illiquidity premium in TIPS yields 3 to the SPF forecast. This comparison yields an

2

In addition to these primary factors, TIPS yields also reflect the taxation difference between TIPS and nominal
issues, the convexity difference between real and nominal yields and the price of the embedded deflation
floor.

3

We used the illiquidity premium in TIPS yields estimated in D’Amico, Kim and Wei (2008). D’Amico, Kim and
Wei calculated the liquidity component for five- and ten-year TIPS yields, which we used to adjust the auction
prices for 5- and 10-year TIPS issues. For twenty- and thirty-year TIPS issues, we assumed that the liquidity
component is equal to the component for a ten-year security, which in the event that these securities are less
liquid than the ten-year note, understates this effect and thus underestimates the risk premium at this horizon.
For further information, see Dudley, Roush and Steinberg Ezer (2008).

BIS Review 14/2009

3

estimate of the premium investors were willing to pay for inflation protection at previous TIPS
auctions. We found an average risk premium estimate of 47 basis points over our sample
period. This suggests that the TIPS program does satisfy a real demand that is not met by
nominal Treasuries.
It also suggests that if the Treasury were to take steps to shrink the illiquidity premium by, for
example, improving secondary market trading in TIPS, this would shift the cost-benefit
analysis more firmly in TIPS direction.
A change in the TIPS illiquidity premium can have a notable impact on ex-ante cost analysis.
For example, at the time this speech was written, the 10-year TIPS breakeven rate was
approximately 1.10 percent, compared to the SPF forecast of 2.50 percent. This is in contrast
to the end of our sample period, which showed them to be about equal. This means that
today TIPS issuance is not very compelling. But it is important to emphasize that this shift
has occurred at a time when the preference for liquidity is especially strong, benefitting
nominal Treasuries versus TIPS. When the market turmoil subsides and this illiquidity
premium shrinks, one might expect TIPS to again move ahead on an ex-ante basis.
So, at this point, the TIPS versus nominal issuance debate is inconclusive. But that’s before
we have included some of the other considerable – although more difficult to quantify –
benefits associated with TIPS issuance.
Let me now discuss some of these other benefits.
Inflation hedge for households
First, TIPS offer a benefit to investors because they have less risk than any other asset
class. With virtually no credit risk or inflation risk, TIPS are one of the safest of investments. 4
For investors that want such safety, TIPS offer significant benefits. Furthermore, the ability
for investors to choose the amount of inflation risk they hold may result in a more optimal
allocation of risk among investors with different tolerances. 5 How much is this worth? Is the
value of this completely captured in the relative interest costs of TIPS? Probably not,
because the relative interest costs between TIPS and nominal Treasuries are set at the
margin. We think there is some value in having a high-quality hedge to inflation risk,
especially one that is available to less sophisticated investors.
Improved monetary policy
The second noteworthy benefit from the TIPS program is that it helps improve the conduct of
monetary policy. Foremost, the program provides up-to-date information about the evolution
of inflation expectations and real interest rates. Because keeping inflation expectations wellanchored is so important in keeping inflation itself in check, real-time measures of inflation
expectations may lead to better monetary policymaking. This, in turn, should improve
macroeconomic performance. Although this is very difficult to quantify in terms of value, I
think it is safe to say that in a $14 trillion economy, even a modest improvement in
performance generates large dollar benefits.
U.S. policymakers focus on a variety of inflation expectation measures, including private
surveys of inflation expectations and market based measures, such as TIPS breakeven
inflation rates. But in practice, the value of the survey-based measures is limited by the lack

4

There is some inflation basis risk in that TIPS are based on the non-seasonally-adjusted consumer price
index, and a household’s expenditure basket might differ from the basket in the CPI. Also, pension and
endowment liabilities may be more closely related to other inflation or wage measures than the CPI.

5

See Campbell and Shiller, 1996.

4

BIS Review 14/2009

of timeliness – new data become available only monthly, quarterly or about every six weeks.
Also, real money isn’t riding on the accuracy of the survey responses. In contrast, the
comparison between nominal Treasury and TIPS yields represents the consensus of market
participants.
For these reasons, policymakers rely importantly on the long-term inflation expectations
proxied by the difference between nominal Treasury note and TIPS yields.
So, how much is this tool worth? Of course, it is very difficult to say. Perhaps, we would
flatter ourselves and think that we could do just as well without such a market-based, realtime measure of inflation expectations. But I doubt it. After all, inflation expectations, when
untethered, are very difficult to re-anchor. TIPS help make it easier to keep inflation
expectations in check.
Improved fiscal policy
The third less quantifiable benefit of TIPS is that the program may create incentives that can
improve the conduct of fiscal policy. TIPS provide an explicit incentive for the fiscal
authorities to conduct policy with an eye toward the consequences for inflation. The public’s
recognition of this incentive may help hold down inflation expectations and cause inflation
expectations to be more firmly anchored.
In addition, TIPS may give the Treasury access to a broader investor base, which also may
reduce the Treasury’s overall borrowing costs. The comparison between the prevailing
interest rates on TIPS versus nominal Treasuries provides insight into the relative costs
associated with issuing a marginal dollar of debt. But just as important is whether TIPS
issuance, by displacing nominal Treasury issuance, reduces the level of interest rates that
the Treasury pays on its nominal issuances. This would occur if TIPS were not perfect
substitutes for nominal Treasury securities and if the demand for nominal Treasuries were
downward sloping – that is, not completely elastic.
The first condition almost certainly holds given the different attributes of TIPS versus nominal
Treasuries. If they were perfect substitutes, then there would not be a liquidity premium for
nominal Treasuries relative to TIPS. The second condition seems likely to hold since
numerous studies have found that an increase in the net amount of Treasury borrowing leads
to higher expected borrowing costs for the Treasury.
How big might this effect be? That’s difficult to estimate. A few studies 6 have found that an
increase in supply in a particular segment of the Treasury yield curve has contributed to a
rise in yields. As a result, by issuing securities in a segmented TIPS market, the Treasury
may keep realized yields on bill and nominal coupon securities lower than they otherwise
would have been.
The last noteworthy fiscal benefit from TIPS issuance is the fact that it reduces risk to the
U.S. government in terms of the variability of its net financial position. The rate of inflation
influences both the cost of TIPS and the government’s tax receipts. Thus, some level of TIPS
issuance may reduce the variability of the government’s net financial position. This, in turn,
should lead to a more regular and predictable pattern of issuance, which should help
minimize interest costs.
In summary, our analysis of the ex-ante costs of the TIPS program and the more difficult-tomeasure benefits suggests that TIPS issuance provides at least a modest net benefit to the
Treasury. So, now I want to turn to a related question: Are there ways to increase the
benefits?

6

See Fleming (2002), Krishnamurthy (2002), Laubach (2003).

BIS Review 14/2009

5

I would be willing to make two modest suggestions here. First, it may make sense to
emphasize longer-dated TIPS issuance rather than shorter-dated issuance. Analytically, the
logic goes as follows. Inflation uncertainty is likely to increase at longer time horizons. Thus,
investors are likely to pay a greater premium for inflation protection at longer-time horizons.
This implies that the cost savings associated with TIPS are likely to be greater for longer
maturities rather than shorter maturities.
This prediction is supported by empirical studies that have examined the premium that
investors pay for inflation protection both in the United States and elsewhere. For example, a
study by Brian Sack of Macroeconomic Advisors finds that forward breakeven inflation rates
increase as maturity lengthens. In contrast, the level of survey-based measures of inflation
expectations is quite constant beyond a time horizon of a few years. This means that the
difference between forward breakeven inflation and inflation expectations climbs as the time
horizon extends. This strongly suggests that the premium investors pay for inflation
protection increases as maturities lengthen.
Second, it may make sense to structure the TIPS program in a way that would help reduce
the illiquidity premium associated with TIPS relative to on-the-run nominal Treasuries. Some
of the current illiquidity premium is likely to shrink as financial markets stabilize. However,
further improvements may require a change in either the structure of the TIPS program or the
secondary market trading environment.
On that note, I leave you with two outstanding questions:
1)

What are the best ways for the U.S. Treasury and the trading community to improve
secondary market liquidity in TIPS?

2)

Given that TIPS appear attractive for the U.S. Treasury, what is the optimal
allocation of the Treasury’s liability portfolio between TIPS and nominal securities?

Thank you for your attention.

6

BIS Review 14/2009

William C Dudley: Financial market turmoil – the Federal Reserve and the
challenges ahead
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Council on Foreign Relations Corporate Conference 2009,
New York, 6 March 2009.
*

*

*

Thank you for having me here today. It is a pleasure being back to speak at the Council. In
the past, my Federal Reserve colleague, Governor Daniel Tarullo, gathered panels of Wall
Street economists here at the Council to talk about economic issues. When he invited me to
participate, it was challenging work because Dan always asked us about our economic
forecasts! And he remembered and recounted our past mistakes (and our much rarer, more
prescient forecasts)!
Before I begin, let me emphasize that my comments represent my own views and opinions
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Open Market Committee or of the
Federal Reserve System.
What has happened to the global financial system is momentous. We have seen – despite
extraordinary actions by central banks and governments around the world – a severe
impairment of the intermediation process between borrowers and savers. We have seen a
massive deleveraging of the non-bank financial sector. We have seen a tightening in
financial market conditions even as the Federal Reserve has pushed the federal funds rate
down close to zero. The result has been a severe loss of confidence among consumers and
business and a global recession.
Today I would like to talk a bit about what went wrong, where we are today, some new
initiatives that are underway, what lessons we should take from the crisis and some steps we
need to take so this doesn’t happen again.
It is well-recognized that one important catalyst for this financial crisis was the easy credit
and loose underwriting practices that fueled the boom in the U.S. housing sector. The ability
of virtually anyone to get a loan to buy a house pushed up home prices significantly faster
than incomes. To keep the boom going, underwriting standards were progressively relaxed,
but even with that support to demand, inevitably the boom proved unsustainable.
As the boom reversed and housing prices began to fall, the bad underwriting practices and
the mispricing of risk became readily apparent. When prices are rising no one needs to
default, they always have the option of refinancing or selling the house at the now higher
price. But when prices are dropping, there is no easy way out. The result has been a sharp
rise in delinquencies and foreclosures as the bust has played out.
The fact that these poorly underwritten loans were used in the construction of very complex
collateralized debt obligations or CDOs, with risks that were not well understood and grossly
mispriced – made a bad situation even worse. Investors who thought they had purchased
safe AAA-rated assets found that these assets were very vulnerable to a housing bust and
that the ratings were unreliable predictors of the risk of loss.
The poor performance of these securities, in turn, made investors much less willing to invest
in structured-finance products more generally. Secondary market liquidity evaporated, which
exacerbated the difficulty in valuing the securities. This made the market even less attractive,
causing risk premia to widen further, which only worsened the valuation problems.
As this process unfolded, the result was a virtual shutdown of the securitization market for
residential mortgage assets not backed by the federal government directly (Ginnie Mae) or
implicitly (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac). The subprime and the Alt-A mortgage markets,

BIS Review 28/2009

1

which relied heavily on the securitization process dried up. Of course, this just reinforced the
downward pressure on housing prices, which, in turn, led to increased delinquencies and
foreclosures. This deterioration undermined the value of the securities further. It was a
vicious feedback loop in action. The poor performance of highly-rated mortgage securities
caused investors to begin to shun securitizations more generally.
The shutdown of the securitization markets led to significant pressure on bank balance
sheets. Banks could no longer securitize non-conforming mortgages or the collateralized
loan obligations associated with leveraged buyouts and other private equity activity that they
had financed. Moreover, bank backstop liquidity lines were triggered as SIVs and conduits
could no longer issue asset-backed commercial paper. Finally, banks took large mark-tomarket losses on their trading books and had to increase their loan loss provisions.
As the crisis continued into 2008, the squeeze on bank balance sheets intensified. This was
driven by several important developments. First, the demise of Bear Stearns increased the
pressure on the other broker dealers to deleverage. They did this, of course, by becoming
less willing to lend funds to their counterparties, such as hedge funds, and by shrinking their
trading books. In the week leading up to Bear’s demise a nasty feedback loop ensued: forced
asset sales increased price volatility. This led to higher haircuts by dealers on their
counterparties, which led to more forced asset sales and still higher volatility.
Second, the failure of Lehman in September accelerated the pace of this deleveraging
process. Major bank intermediaries were frightened by what had happened and were
unwilling to engage with each other. Prime money market mutual funds suffered large
outflows. Investors fled as the news came out that the Reserve Fund had “broken the buck”
because of large losses generated by its holdings of Lehman paper.
By late September we were in a very bad spot. Banks weren’t willing to lend to each other
even at very short term maturities. LIBOR – the London Interbank Offered Rate, which is the
rate that banks offer to lend to each other – soared even as the Federal Reserve continued
to lower its federal funds rate target and injected extra reserves into the banking system.
Merrill Lynch agreed to merge with Bank of America. The equity prices of the two remaining
independent investment banks – Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley – weakened, their
credit default swap spreads widened and this began to undermine their ability to obtain
funding. In response, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley jumped over the regulatory wall
and became bank holding companies.
Hedge funds were forced to liquidate assets as financing terms tightened. As a group, their
performance deteriorated sharply beginning in late summer. This provoked investor
redemptions – further accelerating the speed and scope of the deleveraging cycle.
Although housing and housing finance may have been at the epicenter of the crisis, it is
important, however, to recognize that the crisis goes much deeper. In part, it was rooted in
the overconfidence of investors and borrowers that paid little attention to liquidity and rollover
risk and seemed blind to the risk of a global downturn. It was also rooted in the gaps in
supervision and regulation that allowed a whole range of financial intermediaries and
businesses to become more leveraged, in many cases funding long-term illiquid assets with
short-term borrowing.
To some extent, what has happened can be tied to changes in the nature of the business
cycle and how those changes influenced expectations. Put simply, when business cycles
become more damped and recessions less frequent and less severe, this will cause financial
market participants to take on more risk. This will not appear to be problematic during the
expansion stage. But it will make the financial system much more vulnerable when the bust
does occur. Occurring with less frequency, the bust will be a bigger surprise to market
participants. They will be less well-prepared with the capital buffers and liquidity cushions
needed to traverse an adverse economic environment.

2

BIS Review 28/2009

The complete breakdown in trust across markets has been remarkable. Essentially, it has
gone like this: Even if I think you are a good credit, I am not going to lend to you, because
others may not share the same opinion. The problem is if no one else thinks you are good, I
may not be able to get my money back if I need it. Conversely, others are not willing to lend
to you, even though they think you are a good credit, because they are not convinced that I
will do so. The result is that no one lends, financial conditions tighten and this exacerbates
the downward pressure on the economy. As economic conditions deteriorate, this
undermines the financial strength of the major financial institutions, further reinforcing the
downward spiral in confidence.
Another bad dynamic that exacerbated the crisis has been the reluctance of some banks to
raise the additional capital they might need should the economic outlook deteriorate sharply.
Repeatedly over the past 18 months we have heard – from the GSEs, from the investment
banks, from the commercial banks – now is not a good time to raise capital. This desire to
postpone capital raising stems, in part, to the fact that bank executives often do not want to
dilute the existing shareholders (which, of course, include themselves).
I believe that the management calculus has often gone like this: In good states of the world, I
have enough capital. In bad states of the world, perhaps I don’t. But to raise enough capital
to guarantee I can endure all the potential bad states of the world, I will have to massively
dilute my existing shareholders now. So the self-interested thing to do is to avoid the dilution
and hope for a good state of the world.
This does not always work well in practice. Once capital preservation becomes paramount,
deleveraging intensifies and counterparties grow more wary about engaging. This dynamic,
in turn, makes a bad state of the world more likely. What may be sensible for each institution
individually, may collectively be a bad idea. That is because each firm does not internalize
the cost that their decision not to raise capital has on the overall financial system.
A healthy banking system is always essential. But never has that been more true right now
given what has happened to the securitization markets and the broad “shadow” banking
system.
So where are we now?
In my view, the deleveraging process is still far from complete. Hedge fund redemptions have
soared. It would not be surprising that when we’re done, hedge fund assets (before leverage)
will have fallen in half or more from their peak of about $2 trillion. Of course, the Madoff
scandal and other episodes of misappropriated funds have further undermined confidence,
reinforcing the redemption pressure.
Most importantly, the pressure on the financial system has been exacerbated by the
deterioration in the economic outlook following the Lehman failure. Before last fall, the
causality ran mostly from the turmoil in the financial system to the real economy. Since then,
the real economy has contracted sharply and this has reinforced the balance sheet pressure
on banks and the forced deleveraging process.
So where do we go from here?
Well fortunately, it is not all bad news – there are a number of programs that have been
enacted that have already made a difference. And several new initiatives are being enacted
now that should help to support and bolster the financial system.
Those areas where the Federal Reserve and the Federal government have responded in
force are doing somewhat better. Banks and dealers have plenty of access to liquidity. The
Term Auction Facility or TAF – in which funds are auctioned off to banks – and the Term
Securities Lending Facility or TSLF – in which auctions are held to borrow Treasuries from
the Federal Reserve – have recently been undersubscribed, indicating that the facilities have
been sufficiently sized to meet the demand for liquidity. The FDIC has also guaranteed bank

BIS Review 28/2009

3

and bank holding company funding through its Temporary Guarantee Liquidity Program. As a
result, bank term funding spreads have narrowed a bit this quarter.
However, while the Federal Reserve can provide liquidity to the banks and dealers and the
FDIC can reduce counterparty concerns via its guarantee program, these steps cannot force
banks and dealers to on lend these funds to their customers.
This is where several new initiatives may show the way forward.
First, the Federal Reserve has begun to bypass the banks and dealers, which are balance
sheet constrained, and instead has begun to provide liquidity directly to borrowers. One of
these programs, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility or CPFF has been up and running
since late October.
Under the terms of the CPFF, the Federal Reserve offered to purchase A1-P1 rated
commercial paper at 84-day maturity from issuers. Although A1-P1 rated paper is the highest
quality stuff, it makes up almost all of the CP market. The only catch is that the CPFF will
only buy at rates that are quite high compared to the rates one would expect in the market
during normal times. The Fed has to charge a high rate and up-front fees to provide some
equity in the fund to offset potential credit losses.
This facility has worked extremely well in restoring market function in the commercial paper
market. Initially, there was a surge of issuance into the facility. Commercial paper rates in the
market were high and the issuers wanted to extend the maturity of their obligations. But since
that time, purchases have slowed sharply. Following the introduction of the CPFF,
commercial paper rates in the marketplace dropped below the rates charged by the CPFF.
As a result, issuance into the program has collapsed because many issuers can now raise
funds more cheaply in the private market. About half of the maturing paper in the CPFF has
not been rolled over. As a result, the amount of CPFF holdings, which peaked at around
$350 billion in mid-January, has fallen by over $100 billion, to below $250 billion. To date at
least, the CPFF has worked as planned and has been very successful in rehabilitating the
commercial paper market.
Second, the Term Asset-Backed Security Loan Facility or TALF will provide balance sheet
capacity directly to investors beyond the banking and dealer community. This program is
designed to restart the securitization markets.
The TALF is being rolled out in two stages. In the first stage, which I’ll call TALF Version 1.0,
the Federal Reserve will provide non-recourse loans to investors against AAA-rated
consumer asset-backed securities collateral. Primary dealers will serve as the contact point
with these investors to make it easier for the Fed to interface with potentially hundreds of
investors.
The AAA-rated securities eligible as collateral for this non-recourse lending program are
used to fund a wide variety of consumer and business loans, including student , credit card,
auto and small business administration loans. The market for these securities had dried up
because the traditional investors in these securities – SIVs, bank-related conduits and
securities lenders – have either disappeared or are balance sheet constrained. This has
reduced the availability of credit for consumers and led to higher borrowing costs.
The first subscriptions for financing under TALF Version 1.0 will occur on March 17. The first
batch of new securitizations will be funded on March 25.
TALF Version 2.0 will follow. This will broaden the TALF into new asset classes such as
Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities. Development of this phase is still in its early days.
But it anticipated that the size and scope of TALF will expand sharply in the months ahead.
So how will the TALF restart securitization activity and provide balance sheet capacity to the
private sector? By providing leverage and 3-year term, non-recourse financing to investors,
the TALF should increase the demand for AAA-rated securitizations. Yields of LIBOR + 400

4

BIS Review 28/2009

basis points may not be sufficiently attractive on an unleveraged basis, but at 10 times
leverage the returns become very attractive.
The non-recourse nature of the loans is also important. If the price of the security falls
considerably, the investor just loses an amount equal to size of the haircut. For example, if
the haircut was 10% and the value of the security was $100, the most the investor could lose
would be $10. Thus, the facility eliminates much of the downside risk that would arise from a
very deep recession or the fire sales of assets that could cause prices to drop sharply
temporarily.
This is a very exciting program because it provides balance sheet capacity to risk capital that
cannot currently get leverage. It goes beyond current programs. Just as important, once it is
up and running it can be scaled up and out in many different dimensions. In principle, it could
be applied to other distressed asset classes, it could move down the credit spectrum to
lower-rated tranches, and it could be used to fund older vintage assets.
Two other important initiatives are also in train that deserve note.
Last week the Treasury and the major banking supervisors announced the details of a capital
stress assessment process for all bank holding companies with assets in excess of $100
billion. This process is designed to ensure that the banking system has sufficient, high-quality
capital to be able to absorb the losses that would likely be generated by an economic
scenario considerably worse than generally expected. The stress assessment assumes an
adverse economic environment. For example, under this scenario, the unemployment rate is
anticipated to average more than 10% in 2010, considerably higher than the consensus
economic forecast.
The stress assessment will unfold in three steps. First, each bank holding company will be
asked to evaluate the credit losses that are likely to occur under an adverse economic
environment. These losses would then be evaluated relative to the bank holding company’s
ability to absorb those losses.
Second, if this analysis indicated that the banking organization was likely to fall short of wellcapitalized in the stress environment, the bank holding company would be able to obtain
additional capital via mandatory convertible preferred stock purchased by the Treasury.
Third, if the stress scenario were actually to occur, generating losses that depleted common
equity capital below what is deemed adequate, then the mandatory convertible preferred
would be available to be converted into common equity. The government’s mandatory
convertible preferred investment is, in some sense, contingent capital that is available to be
converted into common equity only as needed.
I believe this program is very important if we are to break the adverse dynamic that I outlined
early. As I mentioned earlier, many bank holding companies don’t have an incentive to raise
sufficient capital to ensure that they can handle a very bad outcome. That is because such
capital-raising would severely dilute existing shareholders. This implies that, left to their own
devices, banks might end up being undercapitalized in a stress environment. The risk of this
outcome makes these banks (and their counterparties) very cautious in terms of their
behavior. This cautiousness, which is rational for each bank and counterparty individually, is
bad for the system because it constrains the supply of credit and results in tighter financial
conditions. This, in turn, makes the bad economic outcome more likely.
The stress assessment regime that is being implemented should help to break this dynamic.
Banking institutions will end up with sufficient capital to withstand even an adverse
environment. This should reassure banks and investors that the banking system will remain
resilient. With more capital in place, more lending should take place. This, in turn, should
reduce the likelihood that the bad economic scenario will, in fact, be realized. The result: a
virtuous rather than a vicious circle!

BIS Review 28/2009

5

The point of the stress assessment is not to pick winners or losers, but instead to ensure that
the banking system and all the major banks have sufficient capital to withstand a very
adverse environment. Following the conclusion of the stress assessment process, the
government is committed to supplying whatever amount of capital is needed to ensure that
all the major banks will remain viable.
The second major initiative that deserves mention is the PPIF or Public-Private Investment
Fund. This facility, which would be underpinned by TARP capital and private capital, would
purchase illiquid, legacy assets. Although the terms and conditions of the PPIF have not yet
been announced, this facility should help put a floor under the prices of lower-quality assets
and provide a means for banks to shed such assets from their balance sheets.
Despite all these efforts, I don’t want to give you the impression that all will be well soon –
that seems unlikely. It will take time for the deleveraging process to come to an end and, as
the recent employment data have underscored, the economy has considerable momentum to
the downside. But the Federal Reserve is prepared to do whatever it takes, within the bounds
of its legal authority, to keep markets working and credit available and affordable.
Finally, what are the lessons to be learned from this crisis? What do we need to fix in order to
make our financial system more robust and our economy less vulnerable? Let me offer up a
short list of seven areas that we might focus on – recognizing that this list is by no means
complete or exhaustive.
•

We need more transparency and homogeneity in securities. The difficulty in valuing
opaque and heterogeneous securities has led to greater illiquidity, price volatility and
market risk, bigger haircuts and more forced deleveraging. Opacity has also led to
an undue reliance on credit ratings.

•

We need central counterparties or CCPs for over-the-counter derivatives in order to
reduce settlement risk. To do this properly, we will have to work with international
supervisors, regulators, and governments to achieve global solutions. On this score,
lots of progress has been made in the credit default swap space – with several new
CCPs likely to be up and running in months, if not weeks. But we can do much more
in this area.

•

We need an accounting and disclosure regime that allows investors to meaningfully
ascertain the risks they are taking. For example, the same assets are often carried
on different bank books at different prices. If you can’t trust the valuation marks on
the assets, how robust can confidence be in the ability of the financial system to
withstand stormy weather?

•

We need a resolution mechanism for bank holding companies and non-bank
financial institutions – legislation is needed here. Judging from the actions of the
past year, there are indeed institutions that are “too big to fail”, at least in certain
circumstances. Let’s set up a resolution framework that is robust and transparent so
everyone understands the rules of the road and likely outcomes beforehand. An ad
hoc approach increases uncertainty and reduces policymaker credibility.

•

If large systemically important institutions are indeed too big to fail, then there needs
to be an explicit quid pro quo for this. Otherwise, this implicit support will create
moral hazard and discriminate against smaller institutions. In particular, important
institutions cannot be allowed to stay outside in the sun during good times, but
allowed to come inside the regulatory net when it is raining.

•

We need a more robust capital regime for banks. Measures of regulatory capital lag
far behind the real-time market-based measures of capital and risk. Moreover, the
capital regime is procyclical. Banks are constrained in the amount of reserves they
can build in good times as a buffer against cyclical downturns. Finally, banks balk at
cutting dividends to conserve capital or replenishing the capital they sorely need in

6

BIS Review 28/2009

the middle of crisis. These incentives reinforce the downward pressure on the
financial system during times of stress.
•

We need a more effective regulatory system. We need a systemic risk authority that
has both the responsibility and the powers to look across the entire financial system
– both depository institutions and the capital markets. Our regulatory regime is
incredibly balkanized, which makes coordination difficult and means that important
information can fall between the cracks. It also leads to less accountability for
supervisory shortcomings and failures, which is another area where we have to do
better.

This list is just a hint of the agenda that lies ahead. We need to put our financial system into
the repair shop for intensive reconstruction. We need to do this in order to rebuild confidence
and to ensure that we do not repeat the type of financial boom and bust that has
characterized this cycle.
Thank you very much for your kind attention, I would be happy to take questions.

BIS Review 28/2009

7

William C Dudley: Oversight of the Federal Government's intervention at
American International Group
Testimony of Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of
Representatives, Washington DC, 24 March 2009.
*

*

*

Good morning, Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and other members of the
Committee. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to appear before you today. As you
know, on January 27, 2009, I became the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York. Before I assumed that position, I served as the head of the Markets Group at the New
York Fed. I appreciate having this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York's involvement with American International Group, Inc. (AIG).
Role of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
At the outset, it is important to note that before the New York Fed became involved with AIG
as a lender on September 16, 2008, the Federal Reserve lacked any kind of authority to
oversee AIG. The lack of effective consolidated supervision over AIG was a critical
contributing factor to the debacle that occurred at the company.
The Federal Reserve made its decision to lend based on a judgment that a failure of AIG
would cause dramatically negative consequences for the financial system and the economy
– consequences worse than what occurred in the aftermath of the failure of Lehman
Brothers. We stand by that judgment today. In the case of Lehman, some of the most severe
repercussions related to the difficulties in coordinating cross-border insolvency regimes and
in coordinating the insolvency regimes among different types of institutions within the
organization's corporate structure. In light of AIG's unparalleled global footprint – operating in
more than 130 countries around the globe – and the multiplicity of different types of financial
services entities within its structure – including insurance providers, foreign banks, consumer
lending companies and OTC derivatives affiliates – the factors that proved unmanageable in
the Lehman insolvency threatened to be much more severe in AIG's case. The fact that no
effective emergency resolution procedures exist under U.S. law to reconcile these difficulties
heightened the need for quick, effective action by the Federal Reserve, in consultation with
and supported by the U.S. Treasury.
From the outset, the New York Fed has been sharply focused on addressing two overarching
goals with respect to AIG: (1) the stabilization of the company so that it no longer poses a
disruptive threat to our financial system and economy and (2) obtaining full repayment of the
government funds that have been extended to AIG. In light of the exceptional size and scope
of AIG's operations, with over 110,000 employees in more than 130 countries, spanning
hundreds of legal entities, it was clear from the beginning that the New York Fed – which had
never been engaged in any regulatory oversight of the company – was not in a position to
exert day-to-day management control over the company. Rather, the New York Fed's actions
have consistently been directed at securing its objectives as lender. As any lender in our
position would do, the New York Fed has put into place a loan agreement that contains
covenants designed to help ensure ultimate repayment of the loan – but these creditor's
rights do not create an ability to manage AIG.
Responsibility for AIG's day-to-day affairs continues to rest with AIG's chief executive officer,
Edward Liddy, under the oversight of AIG's board of directors. Mr. Liddy, who has only
become involved with AIG in a public-spirited attempt to resolve its troubled affairs, has

BIS Review 35/2009

1

made strides in dealing with AIG's opaque corporate structure, lack of centralized controls
and complex risk exposures, but much remains to be done.
In light of the inherent conflicts that would arise from either the U.S. government or the
Federal Reserve exerting ownership control over the world's largest insurer, the Federal
Reserve, with the support of the Treasury Department, directed in the loan agreement that
an approximately 77.9 percent equity interest in AIG be issued to an independent trust
established for the sole benefit of the United States Treasury. The trust, which now holds that
controlling equity interest, is overseen by three independent trustees who are of the highest
integrity and who have considerable experience leading major companies. These trustees
have a legally binding obligation to exercise all of their rights as majority owner of AIG in the
best interests of the U.S. taxpayer, with the proceeds of any ultimate sale of shares going
directly to the Treasury of the United States.
Efforts to reduce risk at AIG Financial Products
As has been widely noted, the activities at AIG's Financial Products unit (FP) were a principal
cause of the losses that drove AIG to the brink of bankruptcy in September 2008. Risks of
substantial magnitude – including derivatives positions with a current total notional value
exceeding one trillion dollars – still remain in force at FP, meaning that not millions but
billions of taxpayer dollars are potentially at stake as the orderly wind-down of FP continues
to progress. The winding down of these risk positions at FP is a delicate and complex matter
with systemic implications for the U.S. and global economy. Our oversight of this riskreduction process remains a top priority.
With respect to the retention awards owed to FP employees under their pre-existing
contracts, we believe that Mr. Liddy weighed a number of factors in deciding not to attempt to
prevent payment, including:
•

the likely negative effects of disruption in staffing at FP in managing its multi-billion
dollar exposures;

•

legal advice that the contracts were valid – meaning that breaking them would likely
increase the amount of company funds ultimately paid to the covered employees;
and

•

the negative consequences to AIG's business that could result from the public
abrogation of contracts.

In conducting our oversight as lender, the New York Fed did not see reason to disagree with
Mr. Liddy's judgment from a risk perspective. Equally important, we did not think it was
legally permissible – or within the proper role of the New York Fed – to attempt to substitute
our judgment for that of Mr. Liddy in this circumstance, even though we found the payment of
the retention awards extremely distasteful.
The broad public disapproval of sizeable retention payments being directed toward the unit
most responsible for last fall's downfall of AIG is understandable. Americans naturally feel
outraged when confronted with news of such payments to an entity that worsened the
financial crisis and that is dependent on taxpayer funds to stay out of bankruptcy court where
these contracts would not have been fully honored. Moreover, the payments occurred during
a time when so many Americans are struggling to find jobs, seeing their wages reduced or
watching their retirement savings plummet as a result of a crisis they had no hand in
creating. This feeling of outrage underscores the urgent need to reform the system of
compensation at our financial institutions to more closely align the incentives of executives,
owners and taxpayers. Congress saw fit to impose appropriate compensation restrictions on
recipients of Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) funding, and we think it is crucial for
Congress and the U.S. Department of the Treasury to continue to craft effective and sensible
policies in this area.

2

BIS Review 35/2009

Although oversight of TARP-related compensation matters rests with the Treasury
Department, the New York Fed has played a role since September in reviewing the
adequacy of AIG's corporate governance procedures. This review has helped to identify
longstanding deficiencies with respect to compensation committee governance,
compensation benchmarking and lack of centralized control over compensation policy. We
will continue to work with our colleagues at Treasury and the independent trustees to ensure
that AIG's management properly addresses these deficiencies.
Ongoing involvement with AIG
The total package of assistance that the Federal Reserve and Treasury Department have
committed to AIG has established a more durable capital structure for the company that
gives AIG greater time and flexibility to execute its asset disposition plan to repay
government funds. Notably, we have recently agreed in principle to accept preferred interests
in two of AIG's large foreign life insurance subsidiaries, AIA and ALICO, in order to make
repayment of our loan less dependent on forced divestitures into a depressed acquisition
market. Although it will take time, we still expect that the proceeds from asset sales should
enable AIG to repay the New York Fed in full.
In all that we have done, we have been motivated by two goals: to preserve the stability of
the U.S. economy and to protect the U.S. taxpayer. The threat of a major systemic risk event
has been averted by honoring all of AIG's contractual obligations around the globe – from
insurance policy obligations owed to individuals, municipalities and businesses across the
U.S., to the posting of collateral under credit default swap arrangements with the full range of
counterparties recently disclosed. As unattractive as certain aspects of this treatment may
be, these negative aspects have followed unavoidably from the decision to avert a
systemically destructive bankruptcy. I look forward to your questions today and, in the longer
term, to working with you and your staffs on the broader public policy questions – such as
formulation of a resolution regime for institutions like AIG and consideration of the
appropriate supervisory structure for OTC derivatives – that are posed by the events at AIG.
Thank you.

BIS Review 35/2009

3

William C Dudley: The Federal Reserve's liquidity facilities
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Vanderbilt University Conference on Financial Markets
and Financial Policy Honoring Dewey Daane, Nashville, Tennessee, 18 April 2009.
*

*

*

Thank you for having me here today. It is a great honor to be on a panel with Peter Fisher
and Bill Poole. I am the neophyte here in terms of central banking experience!
Before I begin, let me emphasize that my comments represent my own views and opinions
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Open Market Committee or of the
Federal Reserve System.
I am going to talk today about the Fed’s provision of liquidity to banks and dealers and to
market participants more generally.
I would break down our actions into three broad classes.
First, we addressed the acute seizing up of inter-bank financing markets. For banks, we
introduced the Term Auction Facility in December 2007 and for the primary dealers, the Term
Securities Lending Facility and Primary Dealer Credit Facility in March 2008. In addition, the
Federal Reserve entered into FX swap agreements with major global central banks in order
to channel dollar liquidity to banks overseas.
Second, we expanded our provision of short term financing beyond banks and dealers in
order to alleviate constraints on highly rated corporate borrowers. The two most noteworthy
examples of this are the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, which was introduced in
October 2008, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Lending Facility (announced in
November 2008, but not up and running until last month.)
Third, once policy rates were near the zero-bound, we expanded the type of assets that the
Fed purchased. In order to put downward pressure on general longer term borrowing rates,
particularly mortgage rates, the Federal Reserve has purchased the debt of the GSEs,
namely, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the mortgage-backed-securities they issue, and,
more recently, longer-term Treasuries.
So why has the Fed done so much in terms of special programs?
As I see it, there are four major reasons behind the dramatic expansion of the Fed’s liquidity
programs:
•

To provide liquidity to banks and dealers in order to slow down the deleveraging
process.

•

To expand the balance sheet capacity of the private sector to counteract the
shrinkage underway in the non-bank financial sector.

•

To restore and improve market function.

•

To ease financial market conditions.

This financial crisis has been marked by the rapid deleveraging of the non-bank financial
sector. This deleveraging has been driven mainly by the collapse of securitization activity,
pressure on dealers to reduce leverage and the spillover of these efforts on to other financial
players such as hedge funds.
This deleveraging process, in turn, has put intense pressure on the balance sheet capacity of
the banking sector. Not only can banks no longer securitize assets as before, but assets that
they thought were off their books have come back on.

BIS Review 48/2009

1

Although the deleveraging process is inevitable following periods when the financial system
has become overextended, it does matter how this deleveraging process takes place. In the
current crisis, the deleveraging process at times has been very violent and dangerous, with
powerful reinforcing feedback loops intensifying the process. During these episodes,
bystanders who did not engage in excess may be trampled and fail. This may exacerbate the
tightening in financial conditions, intensifying the constraint on credit availability and the
downward pressure on economic activity.
For example, in March 2008, in the run-up to Bear Stearns’ demise, the deleveraging
process intensified. Market volatility increased; this caused lenders to increase the haircuts
they assessed against collateral to secure their lending. The higher haircuts, in turn,
squeezed highly leveraged investors who were forced to sell assets. This drove down asset
prices and increased price volatility further, leading to still-higher haircuts. This intensified the
deleveraging process, which led to more mark-to-market losses.
The Federal Reserve’s facilities for banks and dealers have been designed, in part, to slow
down the deleveraging process. The TAF, the TSLF and the PDCF have provided assurance
to banks and dealers that they have a place where they can obtain funding for their less
liquid collateral. As a result, they will not be forced to dump assets, further depressing market
prices, increasing volatility and the upward pressure on haircuts. The deleveraging will still
take place – and we have seen it – just not so quickly and violently that it would destabilize
the entire financial system.
The second major intent of the liquidity facilities has been for the Fed to expand its balance
sheet and, by doing so, offset some of shrinkage that has been occurring among non-bank
financial intermediaries. The fact is the banking system is capital-constrained, with
insufficient capital to expand its balance sheet fast enough to offset the shrinkage evident in
the non-bank sector. Although the Federal Reserve cannot create capital for banks, it can
provide funding directly to the private sector, attenuating the consequences caused by a
balance-sheet-constrained banking system.
The CPFF and the TALF are both important in restoring the flow of credit to borrowers. The
CPFF essentially jump-started the commercial paper market, which had largely shut down
following the failure of Lehman Brothers in September.
The TALF’s purpose is to restart the securitization markets, and thereby lower the cost of
borrowing to households and business. The TALF does this by providing term, non-recourse
loans to investors against AAA-rated collateral. Investor demand for these loans leads to
downward pressure on AAA-rated financing rates, lowering the cost of credit. Although TALF
is off to a relatively slow start – hurt, in part, by the reluctance of some investors to
participate because of worries about the potential implications for them of the TARP funding
that is involved in the TALF program, it has helped to restart the securitization markets in the
consumer asset-backed securities area and has brought down funding costs for consumer
ABS issuers.
The third goal of these policy interventions has been to improve market function. By
dramatically reducing rollover risk, the Federal Reserve’s willingness to serve as the lender
or investor of last resort has helped improve market function in a broad number of areas.
Rollover risk is the risk that a borrower may not be able to obtain new funding in order to
repay an investor when the investor needs the funds for other uses. If rollover risk is high, the
investor is going to be concerned about getting its funds back and, thus, may be unwilling to
make the investment in the first place. The impact of the Fed’s intervention on rollover risk
has been especially important in the triparty repo market and in the commercial paper
market.
The triparty repo market is a market in which investors such as money market mutual funds
lend funds, mostly on an overnight basis, to securities dealers, with the loans collateralized
by high-quality securities. During the crisis, this market became less stable. As the financial
condition of some of the major securities dealers worsened, the clearing banks became more

2

BIS Review 48/2009

reluctant to return the cash that the triparty repo investors had invested the prior evening.
The clearing banks were worried that if a dealer were to fail, they could be stuck with a large
obligation. The nervousness of the clearing banks, in turn, spilled back to the investors. If
there is some chance that I might not get my cash back and instead be stuck with the
collateral, do I really want to make the loan in the first place? The Primary Dealer Credit
Facility essentially broke this dynamic by putting the Federal Reserve in the position of
lender of last resort in the triparty repo system. With the Federal Reserve willing to lend
against collateral, the clearing banks no longer have significant intraday risk exposure. The
triparty repo investors have been reassured that they would be paid back. As a
consequence, they were willing to keep investing.
The TAF and the dollar facilities offered by foreign central banks provided the same antidote
to rollover risk in the interbank funding markets. Banks that were reluctant to lend to one
another because of rollover risk became willing to reengage because they knew that the
Federal Reserve and foreign central banks would lend against high-quality collateral.
By eliminating rollover risk, the CPFF also helped to restore market function in the
commercial paper market. Commercial paper investors who had shunned the market
returned because they were no longer worried that they could get their money back. In
extremis, the Federal Reserve could purchase the commercial paper from the issuer,
generating the funds to repay the private investors’ commercial paper investment.
The fourth and final goal of the Fed’s liquidity facilities has been to ease financial conditions.
This has been particularly important in the current environment because the federal funds
rate cannot be pushed below zero (the so-called zero-bound constraint). This means that
with the federal funds rate having been effectively lowered as far as it can go, the Federal
Reserve has had to turn to other tools such as asset purchase programs if it is to ease
financial conditions further as warranted given macroeconomic conditions.
The Federal Reserve’s purchases of agency debt, agency MBS and longer-term Treasuries
have been implemented mainly with one goal in mind – reduce longer-term private sector
interest rates, and thereby provide stimulus to the U.S. economy.
The Federal Reserve’s Treasury purchase program is designed to hold down the level of
longer-term interest rates. To the extent that a lower level of long-term Treasury rates pulls
down the level of private long-term rates, then these purchases should also ease financial
market conditions.
So how have the Fed’s facilities worked in practice?
In general, I think the facilities have worked quite well. In those areas where the facilities
have been active, we generally have seen an improvement in market conditions.
But the facilities have not been a panacea for three reasons. First, the facilities cannot
address the fundamental problem – the shortage of capital in the banking system. The
facilities can slow down the deleveraging process, but until the banking system is viewed as
being sufficiently well-capitalized and is able to expand its lending activity significantly, the
limits on credit availability caused by an impaired banking system will make it more difficult to
generate a sustainable economic recovery.
Second, there are limits on what the Fed can do legally. For example, the Fed can only lend
if it is secured to its satisfaction. There has to be sufficient collateral available. The Fed
cannot lend on an unsecured basis or provide guarantees. And the Fed cannot purchase
assets other than Treasuries, agencies and agency MBS, and short-dated general
obligations of states and municipalities.
Third, the effectiveness of some of the Fed facilities have been undercut by stigma – the
discount window is the best example of this – or by worries about what other strings are or
might be attached to the use of the facilities – the TALF comes to mind in this respect.

BIS Review 48/2009

3

One reason why the TALF has gotten off to a relatively slow start is the reluctance of
investors to participate. Issuers’ interest, not surprisingly, dwarfs investor demand at this
stage of the program. Some investors are apparently reluctant not because the economics of
the program are unattractive, but because of worries about what participation might lead to.
The TARP loans to banks led to intense scrutiny of bank compensation practices given that
TALF loans are ultimately secured by TARP funds, investor anxiety about using the program
has risen.
My own view is that these fears are misplaced. The TARP funds in the TALF program only
come in on the backend of the program when loans are put back to the Fed. The lending to
investors on the front end is completely a Federal Reserve program and operation. That
being said, I understand the reasons for the anxiety given the political discourse on this
subject. I think it is worth emphasizing that actions that lead investors to shun taking risk,
especially in this environment, are ultimately detrimental to the ability of households and
businesses to secure credit at reasonable borrowing rates.
The Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities and asset purchase programs have led to a
substantial expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet since September 2008.
Currently, the Fed’s balance sheet totals about $2.2 trillion, up from about $900 billion last
fall prior to Lehman’s failure.
In thinking about this balance sheet expansion, I would make three broad points. First, in my
mind, the goal is not the expansion of the balance sheet per se, but the objectives that I laid
out earlier. In this respect, the expansion of the balance sheet differs considerably from
Japan’s experience with quantitative easing. In the current circumstance, the Federal
Reserve’s liquidity programs act on the asset side of the balance sheet as the Fed lends
funds against less liquid collateral and expands its asset holdings via purchases of agency
debt, agency MBS and Treasuries. The goals are to slow down the pace of deleveraging to
reduce the risk of catastrophic failure, improve market function and ease financial market
conditions.
In contrast, the Bank of Japan worked on the liability side of the balance. Their goal was to
expand the amount of excess reserves held by the banking system so that the banks would
be more willing to expand their credit provisions. Although the Fed’s activities have led to a
big jump in excess reserves, this increase is incidental – a byproduct rather than goal of the
asset-oriented programs.
Second, as a consequence of this my point, the size of the balance sheet, is not a good
metric for measuring the impact of the Fed’s facilities or the amount of stimulus that the Fed
is providing via these programs. For example, consider the impact of the Fed facilities on
rollover risk. A Fed facility that eliminates rollover risk might not be used at all. There might
be no balance sheet impact. Nevertheless, the facility could have an important impact on
market function and financial market conditions.
It is not possible to mechanically map the size of the balance sheet back onto the impact on
financial market conditions. That is because the balance sheet size is being driven by a large
number of different actions. Is a dollar of TAF lending equivalent to a dollar extended through
the CPFF or to a dollar of Treasury purchases? How important is the PDCF? It backstops
lots of lending, but outstanding amounts are very low. The differences between the various
programs and activities mean that the balance sheet size should be interpreted in light of the
impact on market function and financial market conditions, not by the impact on the size of
the balance sheet.
The size of the balance sheet is also not a good standard because the use of the different
facilities depends on the degree of impairment in market function. If market conditions were
to deteriorate, I would expect that usage of the Fed’s facilities would increase and the
balance sheet would grow in size. This would be appropriate. The Fed’s balance sheet would
act as a shock absorber, cushioning the impact of the shift in market conditions. In such

4

BIS Review 48/2009

circumstances, the balance sheet would act as a counter-cyclical dampening mechanism. I
would view that as a desirable outcome.
In contrast, if the Fed were committed to a particular balance sheet trajectory, then, as
market conditions improved and financial conditions eased and usage of the Fed’s liquidity
facilities diminished, the Fed would have to offset this by increasing the scope of its liquidity
facilities or by expanding its asset purchase programs. It is unclear to me why the Federal
Reserve would want to apply more stimulus at a time when market conditions were
improving. This suggests that some variability in the trajectory of the Fed’s balance should be
expected and might even be desirable. And, in fact, this is what we have seen in practice.
Third, I am not worried at all that the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet expansion will
generate an inflation problem. It should be emphasized that the Federal Reserve has the
ability to manage down the size of its balance sheet over time once financial conditions and
the economy improve. Many of the liquidity facilities will shrink automatically as financial
conditions normalize. With the exception of TAF loans, all of the other Fed liquidity facilities
charge rates that are higher than what one would expect during more normal financial
circumstances. And, if we want the TAF loans to shrink, we can either shrink the amounts on
offer or raise the interest rate we charge, or both. The other assets such as Treasury
securities and agency MBS can be sold or the impact on reserves be offset by repurchase
operations that drain reserves from the banking system.
More importantly, the Federal Reserve now has the tools to allow the conduct of monetary
policy to be separated from the size of the balance sheet and the amount of excess reserves
in the banking system. In September 2008, the Federal Reserve gained the authority to pay
interest on excess reserves. This provides a tool that allows Fed officials to tighten monetary
policy and raise private sector interest rates by raising the rate paid on excess reserves.
Some skeptics note that when interest on excess reserves was first implemented, the federal
funds rate traded somewhat below the rate on excess reserves. This has created worry in
some quarters that paying interest on excess reserves might not work very well as a tool for
controlling the federal funds rate.
On this issue, two points are warranted. First, the relatively large gap between the interest
rate on excess reserves and the federal funds rate was due, in large part, to the impaired
condition of the banking system, which inhibited the willingness of banks to arbitrage that
gap. Because balance sheet capacity was scarce, banks were reluctant to use their balance
sheets to purchase federal funds at a slight discount to the interest on excess reserves rate.
As the banking system returns to health, this arbitrage is likely to become more attractive,
causing the gap between the interest rate on excess reserves and the federal funds rate to
narrow.
Second, the Federal Reserve could alter its monetary policy framework in order to increase
its control of monetary policy in a large excess reserve environment. It is beyond the scope
of this speech to get into the details, but we have plenty of options in devising incentives for
banks to hold reserves at the Fed that would improve our ability to control the federal funds
rate. The challenge will be deciding on the best option, not in finding a workable approach.
Thank you for your attention.
I am happy to take any questions.

BIS Review 48/2009

5

William C Dudley: A preliminary assessment of the TALF
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association and
Pension Real Estate Association's Public-Private Investment Program Summit, New York,
4 June 2009.
*

*

*

I thank you for this opportunity to speak to you today about what we at the Federal Reserve
have been doing to improve market function and credit market access. Since August of 2007,
the Fed has introduced a wide range of special facilities designed to improve market
functioning, increase the availability of credit and bring down borrowing costs for households
and businesses.
Today, I am going to focus my comments on the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
(TALF), which in my view is one of our most innovative programs. This facility is a
complement to the Public-Private Investment Program efforts being undertaken by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Treasury, which are the primary focus of
today’s conference.
In what follows, I would remind you that my comments reflect my own views and opinions
and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve
System. I will discuss how the securitization markets broke down last fall creating the need
for TALF, how the TALF works and what it already has accomplished, where we see it
evolving going forward, and finally, some preliminary thoughts on the future of securitization
markets.
As you know, one of the origins of this crisis was the poor lending standards and lax risk
controls that led to significant losses among many of the firms that dominate the financial
industry. As the magnitude and widespread nature of these problems became evident in the
early part of 2007, there was an abrupt loss of confidence and a sharp and sustained
increase in risk aversion among investors. Liquidity in short-term funding markets seized up
as concerns over the viability of many bank and non-bank financial institutions increased.
Many of the Federal Reserve’s early efforts – including the Term Auction Facility, Term
Securities Lending Facility and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility – were directly aimed at
restoring the ability of financial firms to obtain access to liquidity. And while it is still too soon
to declare victory on this front, there have been significant improvements in interbank
financing markets.
The next leg of policy intervention focused more directly on shoring up the strength of our
financial institutions with programs such as the Treasury’s Capital Purchase Program and the
FDIC’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program, and here too there has been progress in a
number of dimensions. Most notably, perhaps, is that in the wake of the release of the results
of the recent stress test, the largest U.S. bank holding companies have shown an increased
ability to raise capital and issue debt without government support. The major securities firms
have deleveraged and have built up significant liquidity buffers.
Although conditions in interbank funding markets and capital markets more broadly have
shown signs of improvement, securitization markets are still significantly impaired. This is
particularly true of the asset-backed securities markets, in which much of household and
business credit is intermediated between borrowers and investors.
What has transpired in the asset-backed securities market over the past two years has been
dramatic. Prior to August 2007, as much as 60% of private credit creation in the U.S. was not
held on the books of depository institutions but was instead distributed onwards through the
ABS markets into the so-called “shadow banking system.” Through the use of ABS, banks
were able to package consumer loans, credit card receivables, student loans, residential and

BIS Review 69/2009

1

commercial mortgages, as well as other types of loans into securities that were then sold to
investors.
However, since August 2007, the ABS market collapsed in a series of stages – first subprime
mortgages, then alt-A mortgages and non-agency Residential Mortgage Backed Securities,
and finally consumer ABS and Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities or CMBS. The
collapse spanned every area outside of the agency mortgage-backed securities market,
which is supported by the government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
The final stage of collapse of the ABS markets occurred following the failure of Lehman
Brothers last fall, when the yields on outstanding ABS issues soared and new originations
virtually disappeared. This increase in yields did not solely reflect an increase in credit risk; it
also reflected a genuine loss of confidence and an accompanying increase in risk aversion.
Yield spreads on even the very safest ABS obligations soared hundreds of basis points. This
can be seen in the fact that AAA-rated student loan tranches, with underlying loans 97%
guaranteed by the federal government, climbed to yield levels as much as 400 basis points
over LIBOR.
With the spike in yields, the economic incentives to issue evaporated – issuance was just too
costly and there was no active market. After averaging around $50 billion per quarter of new
originations in 2007 and the first three quarters of 2008, consumer ABS issuance plunged to
only $4 billion during the fourth quarter of 2008. Issuance of commercial mortgage backed
securities ground to a complete halt and this market currently remains closed.
So why did the ABS market collapse? There are many reasons.
One factor was that in some areas, the risk management incentives of banks and other
issuers of ABS were misaligned with those of the end investors in these securities. This
misalignment manifested itself in the overall deterioration in lending standards that took place
across the economy beginning during the middle part of this decade. Some originators did
not do an adequate job of due diligence because the underlying loans were swiftly moved off
their balance sheets through the securitization process. This dynamic should have been
mitigated to some extent by the rating agencies as they assigned ratings to these new
securities, but that process too proved inadequate, especially for residential real estaterelated securities. The problems associated with these misaligned incentives for issuers and
inadequate rigor on the part of the rating agencies became apparent as the housing sector
turned down and the economy weakened. The result was a dramatic spike in credit losses
and an almost complete loss of investor appetite for non-agency, residential mortgagebacked product.
A second factor contributing to the collapse of the ABS market was that the benefits of
pooling and distributing risk more widely proved to be somewhat illusory. In practice, the
performance across different loans that collateralized the securities was much more highly
correlated than was anticipated, and the risks associated with these securities was
significantly more concentrated than had been assumed. Some banks that were unable to
sell the highest-rated tranches kept them on their books. In other cases, the sales were
made to off-balance sheet vehicles, in which the banks retained residual risk. This correlation
contributed to the aversion of investors to the asset class as a whole.
A third contributing factor was the fact that these securities were often complex and
heterogeneous and, thus, hard to value. In a stressed economic environment, this complexity
exacerbated the erosion in market liquidity conditions, which in turn led to a vicious circle of
falling prices and even further diminished liquidity. The result was that some bank conduits
and buyers of securitized products such as SIVs became distressed and failed as mark-tomarket losses increased. In the post-Lehman bankruptcy world – when liquidity was
paramount – securitized products were very difficult to trade, in part, because they were very
difficult to value.

2

BIS Review 69/2009

The cessation of new asset-backed securitizations has been problematic because banks
have not had the capacity to keep credit flowing freely. This is especially true given that bank
balance sheets were already under strain – bank capital has been depleted by credit losses
and bank balance sheet capacity has been strained by an inability of banks to securitize new
loan originations and by the need for banks to honor their off-balance sheet obligations.
For all these reasons, the Federal Reserve determined that it was important to augment the
balance sheet capacity of the financial system by supporting the ABS market. This was the
purpose of the TALF. By providing non-recourse, term financing for new AAA-rated
consumer asset-backed securities to investors, the TALF essentially provides the balance
sheet capacity necessary to facilitate the continued flow of credit to households and
businesses.
The TALF offers three attributes that the private sector has had difficulty providing during this
time of financial and economic distress: 1) leverage to purchase highly-rated, low-risk assets,
2) term financing and 3) protection against very adverse economic outcomes. TALF loans
are leveraged – haircuts against the AAA-rated collateral average about 10%; the loan terms
are three or five years; and the loans are non-recourse, which means that if the economy
performs very badly and the securities fall sharply in value, an investor can put the collateral
that secures its TALF loan back to the Fed, only losing the collateral haircut. The loan is then
extinguished.
Because term, non-recourse financing is not readily available from the private sector
currently and the spreads on asset-backed securities remain elevated, TALF provides an
opportunity for investors to purchase AAA-rated consumer asset-backed securities and earn
relatively high returns. Although some observers are concerned by the prospect of TALF
investors achieving relatively high returns, I think that concern is misplaced. Investor
participation is absolutely essential in order for the TALF to improve the availability of credit
and to bring down the cost of credit for households and business. The prospect of relatively
high expected risk-adjusted returns is precisely what gives investors an incentive to
participate in the program. As investors begin to take advantage of the attractive TALF terms,
spreads on ABS securities contracts, and rates of return go down, and most importantly, the
costs of funds for the issuers of the underlying securities falls. Investors’ actions to seek
attractive returns lead to lower borrowing costs for households and businesses.
Does the possibility of attractive returns for TALF investors mean that the Federal Reserve is
taking on large credit risks? I think the answer is a clear “no,” principally because the returns
earned by investors primarily are due to the absence of sufficient private balance sheet
capacity rather than underlying credit risk. In fact, from the Federal Reserve’s perspective,
the risk of loss is very low. Indeed, there are three layers of protection that stand between the
Federal Reserve and losses.
First, the underlying securities are AAA-rated, which means that losses on the underlying
loans have to be unusually large to move that high up in the capital structure. And although
some of the rating agency models have not held up well in the crisis, the consumer ABS
models have proven to be reasonably robust. In other words, a AAA-rating still means quite a
bit in this market. This is in contrast to the collateralized debt obligation or CDO market,
where AAA-rated securities often used subprime and Alt-A mortgage loans as their raw
ingredient.
Second, as noted earlier, the Fed has taken additional haircuts against the underlying
securities averaging about 10%. These haircuts provide additional protection to the Fed.
Third, if the underlying collateral is put back to the Fed, the Fed puts the collateral into a
special purpose vehicle. In such a situation, the Fed would be protected by the excess
spread earned on the TALF loans and Treasury-provided TARP capital. Only if those buffers
were wiped out, would the Fed suffer losses.

BIS Review 69/2009

3

We have done stress simulations on the underlying loans. We think it is unlikely that the
Treasury will lose money on this program, and it sits ahead of the Fed in terms of its loss
exposure. The risk posed to the Federal Reserve therefore seems quite remote. Instead, we
expect that the program will be profitable for the taxpayers and will be successful in pushing
down yields and increasing credit availability.
Turning from the issues of design and risk to issues concerning implementation and
effectiveness, we have been rolling the TALF out in stages – first the consumer ABS market,
with the first subscriptions for TALF loans in March; second, new CMBS securitizations that
will start in early summer; and third, legacy CMBS and, possibly legacy RMBS, later this
summer.
By legacy assets, we mean highly-rated existing securitized assets that are already
outstanding. The legacy TALF program will help support asset-backed-securities prices. This
should help aid market liquidity and make financial firms that hold such assets less
vulnerable to the risk of further losses.
So far, the evidence indicates that the program is working as designed.
First, the issuance of consumer ABS securities has been gradually reviving. In March, four
deals came to market worth $8.3 billion. In April, there were another 4 deals worth $2.9
billion. In May, there were 8 deals worth $13.6 billion and this week, there were 13 deals
worth $16.4 billion. We’re not back yet to the $200 billion annual rate of issuance before the
crisis and we don’t expect to get there, but we are making a good start. Moreover the type of
deals has broadened out to include a wide range of asset classes. For example, this month’s
deals included credit card, auto loan and lease, equipment leasing, insurance premium and
mortgage servicer securitizations.
Second, the market for such deals is not wholly reliant on TALF financing. TALF loans have
accounted for a bit more than half of total issuance volume of ABS, with considerable
variability from subscription to subscription period. We view this as a good thing. This means
that the TALF is helping to restart the market, rather than the TALF being the market.
Third, and most importantly, spreads on consumer ABS have been coming down sharply
from their peak levels reached late last year. For example, the spreads on AAA-rated credit
card ABS have narrowed from a peak of about 600 basis points over LIBOR to slightly above
200 basis points currently. Encouragingly, spreads of even lower-rated ABS – securities that
are not TALF eligible – have also narrowed quite significantly. Although it is still too early to
say the TALF has been a resounding success, we at the Fed are encouraged by the results
so far.
While we are generally pleased with how the TALF program has been evolving, many
challenges remain. One challenge is in striking the appropriate balance between sufficient
protections against abuse of the program, on the one hand, and a degree of red tape and
restrictions that could make the program unattractive to issuers and investors, on the other.
To the extent that issuers and investors are unwilling to participate in TALF because of fears
that their involvement might lead to unforeseen complications at a later date, this would lead
to the unattractive outcome of underutilization and the achievement of only a portion of the
potential benefits.
Of course it is of critical importance in this facility and in all the programs instituted in
response to this crisis that the interests of the taxpayer be protected, and the safeguards and
restrictions on the use of TARP funds are designed to achieve this. However, I think it is fair
to say that TALF got off to a relatively slow start because investors were worried that the use
of TARP funds in TALF could restrict their ability to conduct their business activities more
broadly, perhaps in unanticipated ways and potentially retroactively. Put simply, to the extent
that the use of TARP monies creates stigma, this may limit the effectiveness of TALF and
other programs that use TARP funds. Although we think these fears among market

4

BIS Review 69/2009

participants that use TALF are misplaced, such anxieties have had an impact on the
program.
Another challenge faced by the TALF is to increase the participation of real money investors
(such as mutual funds, pension funds and insurance companies), many of whom are not
permitted to use leverage. We at the Fed are working through a number of highly complex
issues to enable the creation of vehicles that will make it easier for a broader range of
investors to have access to financing for ABS securities. The broader the investor base, the
greater the demand for the securities, the lower the yield levels and the greater the
improvement in credit availability.
The rollout of TALF to the Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities market this summer will
be important in determining the overall success of the program. The revival of the CMBS
market is essential to stabilizing the commercial real estate market. As you know,
commercial real estate values are under pressure for several reasons. Capitalization rates
have climbed significantly, reducing commercial real estate valuations. In addition, the
income generated from commercial property has diminished due to the contraction in overall
economic activity. If the availability of funding for this market is not restored, the downturn in
commercial real estate valuations and the losses for the holders of these assets will be
greater. This will, in turn, likely further constrain credit availability.
A revival of the CMBS market is also important to accommodate the demand for funds to
refinance commercial mortgage loans that will be coming due over the next few years. If the
CMBS market remains shut down, it is unclear where these funds will come from. After all, in
recent years, the CMBS market has satisfied about 40% of the credit needs of the
commercial mortgage sector. If this market is closed, then the refinancing of maturing
mortgages will be exceedingly difficult and this will exacerbate the drop in commercial real
estate prices, loan defaults and the pressure on bank capital.
Finally, I want to consider briefly whether TALF will turn out to be a band-aid – providing
temporary support to otherwise defunct securitization markets – or a bridge to an ultimately
revived and vital securitization market. I think it is too soon to reach a firm conclusion one
way or the other. I suspect that we will discover that some parts of the securitization market
will return and prove viable even without government support. But other parts of these
markets were fundamentally flawed, and they will not survive, nor should they.
On a positive note, the fact that there has been an increase in investor demand for consumer
ABS that does not use TALF financing is an encouraging sign. This indicates that more
traditional investor classes, such as pension funds and insurance companies that don’t
usually use leverage, are starting to stick a toe in the water. However, it is hard to believe
that there will not be significant changes to the structure of this asset class in the wake of the
recent crisis.
So what are some of the changes that I foresee or otherwise feel are required?
First, there needs to be a better alignment of incentives between the lenders and securities
dealers that originate and securitize the loans and the investors that purchase these
securities. One suggestion that has received significant attention is for banks to retain a
portion of the securitization on their balance sheets. The notion is that with “some skin in the
game,” those making the loans will show greater due diligence in terms of the underwriting
standards applied to the underlying loan originations. In some ways, the TALF program is
already facilitating this outcome, with the highly-rated AAA-rated securities sold to investors
and the lower-rated tranches generally retained by the issuers.
Second, I suspect that investors will become less reliant on the rating agencies – conducting
more due diligence themselves.
Third, I believe there will be a greater focus among investors on standardized,
homogeneous, easy-to-evaluate products. This will improve the underlying liquidity of

BIS Review 69/2009

5

securitizations, which should result in lower lending costs and should make the assessment
of the risk of the assets easier.
Fourth, I think the overall securitization market will be smaller. The demise of parts of the
shadow banking system such as the SIVs and the fact that banks are likely to have to
consolidate some off-balance activities back onto their books at the end of this year should
reduce the overall demand for and supply of securitized product.
Developing and implementing the TALF has been challenging. As the program enters into a
new phase with the financing of CMBS and legacy CMBS, we will encounter further hurdles
that we will have to overcome, adjusting and modifying the program as needed in order to
make it more effective. Nevertheless, I am confident that we will continue to build on our
initial success, reopening credit channels to consumers and businesses.
Thank you very much for your attention.

6

BIS Review 69/2009

William C Dudley: Lessons learned from the financial crisis
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Eighth Annual BIS Conference, Basel, 3 July 2009.
*

*

*

In assessing the lessons of the past two years, I will focus on five broad themes that are
interrelated:
•

Interconnectedness of the financial system

•

System dynamics – How does the system respond to shocks?

•

Incentives – Can we improve outcomes by changing incentives?

•

Transparency

•

How should central banks respond to asset bubbles?

As always, my views are my own and may not necessarily reflect those of the FOMC or the
Federal Reserve System.
Interconnectedness
This financial crisis has exposed how important the interconnections are among the banking
system, capital markets, and payment and settlement systems. Focus on only one part of the
financial system can obscure vulnerabilities that may prove very important. For example, the
disruption of the securitization markets caused by the poor performance of highly-rated debt
securities, led to significant problems for major financial institutions. Banks had to take
assets back on their books; backstop lines of credit were triggered; and banks could no
longer securitize loans, increasing the pressure on their balance sheets. This reduced credit
availability, which increased the downward pressure on economic activity, which caused
asset values to decline further, increasing the degree of stress in the financial system.
The high degree of interconnectedness across the financial system has a number of
implications. First, supervision must not just be vertical – firm by firm, or region by region, but
also horizontal – looking broadly across banks, securities firms, markets and geographies.
Second, this means that supervisory practices need to be revamped. They need to be
coordinated and multi-disciplinary. I think the U.S. Treasury is right in proposing a systemic
risk regulator as part of their regulatory reform plan. But, we shouldn’t kid ourselves about
how difficult this will be to execute. You will need a flexible and dynamic governance process
to be able to identify the important elements of systemic risk, to elevate those concerns to
the appropriate level and then to act on those concerns in a timely manner. It will take the
right people, with the right skill sets, operating in a system with the right culture and legal
framework. I don’t believe creating this oversight process will be an easy task. Consider, for
example, subprime lending. There were obvious excesses in terms of underwriting
standards, product design and risk management. But addressing those issues during the
boom would have required the supervisor to absorb attacks that reining in some of these
practices would make it more difficult for some low- and moderate-income households to
become homeowners for the first time.
System dynamics
In thinking about interconnectedness, we also need to focus on system dynamics. By system
dynamics, I mean how the different parts of the system interact. Do they interact in a way
that dampens a shock or in a way that intensifies it? To the extent that the system has

BIS Review 83/2009

1

important reinforcing rather than dampening mechanisms, then it may need to be modified.
That may require significant re-engineering.
Let me give you some examples of reinforcing and dampening mechanisms:
Capital. When firms have incentives to continue to pay dividends to show they are strong that
is a reinforcing or amplifying mechanism. The paying of the dividends depletes capital,
making the firms weaker. In contrast, when firms have incentives (or are forced) to cut
dividends quickly to conserve capital, that is a dampening mechanism.
Foreign exchange. When the debts of a country held by foreigners are denominated
predominantly in the home currency, currency depreciation reduces the net debt burden –
the value of foreign assets climbs relative to the asset claims of foreigners. The U.S.
operates in a dampening regime in this respect. In contrast, when the debts of the home
country are denominated in foreign currency, currency depreciation increases the net debt
burden. Some of the Baltic countries are wrestling with this dilemma currently.
Some reinforcing mechanisms that we might want to engineer out of the financial system:
•

Collateral tied to credit ratings. Credit downgrades lead to increased collateral calls
which drains liquidity, leads to forced asset sales, further weakening the firm subject
to the collateral calls. I don’t have any great ideas on how to address this, but it is a
problem that needs to be fixed.

•

Collateral and haircuts. When volatility rises and that leads to increased haircuts, the
result can be a vicious cycle of forced asset sales, higher volatility and still higher
haircuts.

•

Compensation tied to short-term revenue generation, rather than long-term
profitability over the cycle. This causes risk-takers to take on too much risk because
they are compensated on the upside. This extends the boom.

Incentives
Incentives may be very important in determining whether we have a system that is
dampening rather than amplifying. I think bad outcomes are not just about bad luck, they are
also about bad incentives. The problem with incentives may be due to faulty compensation
schemes, poor risk management or the fact that participants do not bear the full costs of their
actions.
One problem that we had in the U.S. banking system over the past year was a reluctance of
banks to raise sufficient capital to be able to withstand bad states of nature. They didn’t want
to do this because this might unnecessarily dilute their shareholders. As a result, many
banks did not hold sufficient capital and market participants knew this. This led to tighter
financial and credit conditions, which made the bad state of the world more likely. This is an
example of both bad incentives and an amplifying mechanism.
The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) exercise that we undertook in the
United States leaned against this. By forcing all the banks to have sufficient capital to
withstand a stress environment, we increased the likelihood that all the big banks would be
able to survive a stress environment. This generated an improvement in confidence and a
willingness of banks to engage with each other. This also made it easier for banks to be able
to tap the capital markets. The SCAP exercise made a bad state of the world outcome less
likely, helping to create a virtuous circle rather than a vicious one. The SCAP exercise was
conducted on an ad hoc basis. It probably would be much better to figure out how to do
these types of exercises on a systematic basis. Such exercises may need to be hardwired
into the oversight of the financial system.
Capital requirements are one area where I think we could adjust the rules in a way to
improve incentives. For example, imagine that we mandated that banks had to hold more

2

BIS Review 83/2009

capital, but that the added capital could be in the form of a debt instrument that only
converted into equity if the share price fell dramatically. What would this do? It would change
management’s incentives. Not only would management focus on generating higher stock
prices, but they would also worry about risks that could cause share prices to fall sharply,
resulting in dilution of their share holdings.
Debt convertible into equity on the downside would also be helpful in that it would be a
dampening mechanism – equity capital would be automatically replenished, but only when
this was needed.
Transparency
There were many areas where a lack of transparency contributed to a loss of confidence,
which intensified the crisis. One particular area was the case of over-the-counter securities
such as ABS, CMBS, RMBS and CDOs and their associated derivatives.
There was a lack of transparency in a number of different dimensions.
A.

Valuation. CDOs and other securitized obligations were complex and difficult to value.
This reduced liquidity, pushed down prices and created increased uncertainty about
the solvency of institutions holding these assets.

B.

Prices. The lack of pricing information led to a loss of confidence about accounting
marks. Sometimes identical securities were valued differently at different financial
institutions.

C.

Concentration of risk. Because there was no detailed reporting of exposures, market
participants did not know much about the concentration of risk. This led to a
reluctance to engage with counterparties, which, in turn, pushed up spreads and
reduced liquidity further.

The SCAP exercise was an example where increased transparency helped to generate a
better outcome. We disclosed our stress test methodology and the results for each of the
nineteen largest bank holding companies. This transparency increased confidence and made
it easier for the banks to raise more capital.
Monetary policy and asset bubbles
In my opinion, this crisis should lead to a critical reevaluation of the view that central banks
cannot identify or prevent asset bubbles, they can only clean up after asset bubbles burst.
As I wrote in 2006, this orthodoxy can be summarized by three propositions:
1.

Asset bubbles are hard to identify.

2.

Monetary policy is not well-suited to respond to bubbles.

3.

Thus, the cost/benefit tradeoff of “leaning against the wind” against asset bubbles is
unfavorable.

From these propositions, the two important policy implications directly follow:
1.

The central bank should only take asset bubbles into consideration in the conduct of
monetary policy to the extent that these asset bubbles affect the growth/inflation
outlook.

2.

The monetary authorities should be there to “clean-up” after bubbles burst, both to
prevent systemic problems and undesired downward pressure on economic activity
and/or inflation.

Relative to this, I would argue that:

BIS Review 83/2009

3

1.

Asset bubbles may not be that hard to identify – especially large ones. For example,
the housing bubble in the United States had been identified by many by 2005, and
the compressed nature of risk spreads and the increased leverage in the financial
system was very well known going into 2007.

2.

If one means by monetary policy the instrument of short-term interest rates, then I
agree that monetary policy is not well-suited to deal with asset bubbles. But this
suggests that it might be better for central bankers to examine the efficacy of other
instruments in their toolbox, rather than simply ignoring the development of asset
bubbles.

3.

If existing tools are judged inadequate, then central banks should work on developing
additional policy instruments.

Let’s take the housing bubble as an example. Housing prices rose far faster than income. As
a result, underwriting standards deteriorated. If regulators had forced mortgage originators to
tighten up their standards or had forced the originators and securities issuers to keep “skin in
the game”, I think the housing bubble might not have been so big.
I think that this crisis has demonstrated that the cost of waiting to clean up asset bubbles
after they burst can be very high. That suggests we should explore how to respond earlier.
Harkening back to my earlier themes, I think we can respond in a number of ways:
•

First, we can do a better job understanding interconnectedness. This means
changing how we oversee and supervise financial intermediaries.

•

Second, we can change the system so that it is more self-dampening.

•

Third, we can improve incentives.

•

Fourth, we can increase transparency.

•

Fifth, we can develop additional policy instruments. For example, we might give a
systemic risk regulator the authority to establish overall leverage limits or collateral
and collateral haircut requirements across the system. This would give the financial
authorities the ability to limit leverage and more directly influence risk premia and this
might prove useful in limiting the size of future asset bubbles.

4

BIS Review 83/2009

William C Dudley: The economic outlook and the Fed's balance sheet –
the issue of "how" versus "when"
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Association for a Better New York Breakfast Meeting, New
York, 29 July 2009.
*

*

*

It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here at the Association for a Better New
York. This group has obviously been very successful. New York today is a far different and
vastly superior place from what I found when I first arrived as a freshman at Columbia
University in 1970.
Today, I’d like to accomplish two tasks. First, I’ll comment briefly on the economy and the
economic outlook – where we have been and where we may be going. I’m going to suggest
that the balance of risks is still tilted toward weakness in growth and employment and not
toward higher inflation. I will also argue that it is premature to talk about “when” we are going
to exit from this period of unusual policy accommodation.
Second, I will talk about the impact of the Federal Reserve’s lending facilities and purchase
programs on the size of the Fed’s balance sheet. I’ll explain why an expanded balance sheet
does not constrain our ability to exit from the current degree of policy accommodation. In
other words, contrary to what is sometimes argued, it is not the case that our expanded
balance sheet will inevitably prove inflationary. It is important that this critical issue be well
understood. The public must be absolutely confident that the Fed can meet its monetary
policy objectives of low and stable inflation and sustainable economic growth. Before I begin
to get into these issues in earnest, let me note that, as always, the views I put forward today
are my own and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.
Turning first to the outlook, the economic contraction appears to be waning and it seems
likely that we will see moderate growth in the second half of the year. The economy should
be boosted by three factors: 1) a modest recovery in housing activity and motor vehicle
sales; 2) the impact of the fiscal stimulus on domestic demand; and 3) a sharp swing in the
pace of inventory investment. In fact, if the inventory swing were concentrated in a particular
quarter, we could see fairly rapid growth for a brief period.
Regardless of the precise timing, there are a number of factors which suggest that the pace
of recovery will be considerably slower than usual. In particular, I expect that consumption –
which accounts for about 70 percent of gross domestic product – is likely to grow slowly for
three reasons. First, real income growth will probably be weak by historical standards. There
were a number of special factors that boosted real income in the first half of the year, helping
to offset a sharp drop in hours worked and very sluggish hourly wage gains. These factors
included the sharp drop in gasoline and natural gas prices; the large cost-of-living-allowance
increase for Social Security recipients reflecting last year’s high headline inflation; a sharp
drop in final tax settlements; a reduction in withholding tax rates; and a one-time payment to
Social Security recipients. These factors provided a transitory boost to real incomes, which
will be absent during the second half of the year. As a result, real disposable income is likely
to decline modestly over this period.
Second, households are still adjusting to the sharp drop in net worth caused by the persistent
decline in home prices and last year’s fall in equity prices. This suggests that the desired
saving rate will not decline sharply. That means consumer spending is unlikely to rise much
faster than income. In other words, weak income growth will be an effective constraint on the
pace of consumer spending.

BIS Review 94/2009

1

Moreover, some sectors such as business fixed investment in structures are likely to
continue to weaken as existing projects are completed. In an environment in which vacancy
rates are high and climbing, prices are falling, and credit for new projects is virtually
nonexistent, this sector is likely to be a significant drag on the economy over the next year.
Perhaps most important, the normal cyclical dynamic in which housing, consumer durable
goods purchases and investment spending rebound in response to monetary easing is
unlikely to be as powerful in this episode as during a typical economic recovery. The financial
system is still in the middle of a prolonged adjustment process. Banks and other financial
institutions are working their way through large credit losses and the securitization markets
are recovering only slowly. This means that credit availability will be constrained for some
time to come and this will serve to limit the pace of recovery.
If the recovery does, in fact, turn out to be lackluster, the unemployment rate is likely to
remain elevated and capacity utilization rates unusually low for some time to come. This
suggests that inflation will be quiescent. For all these reasons, concern about “when” the Fed
will exit from its current accommodative monetary policy stance is, in my view, very
premature.
In contrast, I think it is important to address today the issue of “how” the Fed can exit from
the current stance of policy when the time comes, even if its numerous special facilities and
purchase programs continue to keep the size of its balance sheet at an expanded level.
Why do I believe it is so important to explain the issue of “how” having just argued that
“when” is not yet a pressing issue? The reason is that if people believe – correctly or
incorrectly – that the Federal Reserve could have a problem managing a smooth exit from its
accommodative policy stance, this belief alone could have the adverse effect of causing
inflation expectations to become less well anchored and risk premia on long-dated debt
securities and loans to rise. These effects could conceivably make it more difficult to
generate a sustainable economic recovery.
This risk seems significant. For example, just last week a major bank published a survey of a
broad array of 1800 investors. Of those surveyed, 20 percent thought that inflation might
average more than 2.5 percentage points per year above their assessment of the Federal
Reserve’s target. This outcome presumably reflects two factors – the balance-sheet
expansion of the Fed and the large fiscal deficit.
With this in mind, let me spend the remainder of my time discussing the sources of growth in
the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the past year and a half or so, and explain why I
am confident that the exit from our accommodative policy stance, as well as from our various
lending facilities and purchase programs, can be handled smoothly.
As you are aware, the Federal Reserve has been engaged in a wide array of unprecedented
activities over the past two years in response to the financial crisis. These include:
•

Liquidity facilities designed to improve market function. These include facilities
oriented to banks and dealers such as the Term Auction Facility (TAF), Primary
Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) and the foreign exchange swap programs; and facilities
designed to improve market function in impaired parts of the money and capital
markets such as the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) and the Term AssetBacked Securities Loan Facility (TALF).

•

Purchase programs oriented to easing financial conditions. These include the agency
debt, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and Treasury purchase programs.

•

Several firm-specific interventions in which the Federal Reserve has taken on illiquid
asset portfolios from Bear Stearns and AIG, with the goal of managing and liquidating
these asset portfolios over time in a manner that is in the best interests of the federal
government and the U.S. taxpayer.

2

BIS Review 94/2009

These programs have led to significant changes in both the composition and size of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. For example, in August 2007, prior to the onset of the
crisis, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet was about $870 billion. Currently, the size of the
balance sheet is about $2 trillion. To gain a better understanding of how we got to where we
are now, I think it is useful to divide the past two years into three distinct phases.
The first stage I’ll define as the period running roughly from the start of the crisis in August
2007 to September 2008. During this stage, the Fed’s monetary policy implementation
regime worked in such a way that control over the size of its balance sheet, and more
specifically over the level of excess reserves, was essential to ensure that the Open Market
Desk could control the fed funds rate in a manner consistent with the FOMC’s monetary
policy objectives. Had the Fed’s special liquidity facilities grown sufficiently large during that
period, raising the level of the excess reserves in the banking system, the fed funds rate
would likely have fallen far below the FOMC’s target rate. To keep the fed funds rate around
the target, the only sure-fire option was to avoid a significant expansion in the balance sheet
by funding the expansion of nontraditional assets, such as TAF loans, FX swaps, and PDCF
loans with similarly sized liquidations of the Federal Reserve’s portfolio of Treasury
securities. Thus, over the period from August 2007 up through the time of the Lehman
Brothers failure in September 2008, the total size of the Fed’s balance sheet and the level of
excess reserves in the banking system changed very little.
The second stage began in October 2008 when the Federal Reserve gained the authority to
pay interest on reserves, including excess reserves. The addition of interest on reserves to
the Fed’s toolkit effectively broke the link between the size of the Fed’s balance sheet and
the stance of monetary policy. Policymakers now had the capacity to expand the size of the
Fed’s liquidity facilities and other programs without the threat of compromising the control of
monetary policy. This new tool immediately proved enormously helpful. The Fed was able to
respond to the deterioration of conditions in the fall of 2008 by sharply increasing the size of
its Term Auction Facility program and removing the limits on the size of many of the foreign
exchange swap programs. These programs, along with the increased use of the Fed’s
standing liquidity facilities and the start-up of the Commercial Paper Funding Facility in late
October, led to a sharp growth in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet beginning in late
September.
The third phase is marked by the launch of the Fed’s purchase programs, starting with the
agency debt program that began in December 2008 and extends through to the present.
During this phase, the Fed’s overall balance sheet has actually declined slightly. The
demand for the Fed’s special liquidity programs has diminished more quickly than the
purchase programs have been ramped up. Although this shrinkage was not anticipated or
targeted, it is a welcome indication that there has been improvement in the functioning of the
short-term funding markets. 1 As market function has improved and credit spreads have
narrowed, many of the Fed’s liquidity facilities have become less attractive and there has
been a corresponding decline in usage. For example, outstanding foreign exchange swaps
have declined from a peak of $586 billion last December to about $110 billion currently, and
outstanding commercial paper held by the CPFF has fallen from a peak of about $350 billion
last fall to around $110 billion currently.
Despite the recent dip in the size of the balance sheet, the size of the purchase programs
underway makes it likely that balance-sheet growth will resume as assets acquired in
conjunction with these programs overwhelm any further declines in the funds advanced via
the shorter-term liquidity facilities. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet seems
likely to grow to roughly $2.5 trillion, somewhat above the peak reached last December.

1

However, it was anticipated that the attractiveness of the Fed’s facilities would decline as market conditions
improved. In fact, it was a key element of the exit strategy that was deliberately built into the design of most of
the facilities.

BIS Review 94/2009

3

It is no coincidence that the growth of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet since last fall has
been accompanied by a sharp rise in the amount of excess reserves. When the Federal
Reserve extends a loan or purchases a security, this automatically adds reserves to the
banking system unless the Fed undertakes an offsetting reserve draining operation. Although
some of the excess reserves that have been generated by the balance-sheet expansion
were initially sopped up by the Treasury’s Supplemental Financing Program, total excess
reserves have climbed to more than $700 billion from nearly zero at the beginning of the
crisis.
The sharp rise in excess reserves has caused the monetary base, which is simply the sum of
currency plus total reserves, to expand significantly. The increases in excess reserves and in
the monetary base generated by the Fed’s balance-sheet growth have led some observers to
worry that this expansion will ultimately prove inflationary. Proponents of this view say that
the monetary base, the broad monetary aggregates, total credit outstanding and inflation
have historically tended to move together, at least over longer time periods. Thus, if the
monetary base is growing rapidly, as it has been over the past year, the view is that this
growth will ultimately lead to inflation.
Is this concern well founded? The answer is that in a world where banks could not be paid
interest on excess reserves, these persistent high reserve balances would indeed have the
potential to prove inflationary. 2 In that world, the excess reserves are likely to lead ultimately
to an overly accommodative monetary policy. The story goes like this: If banks are earning
no interest on their excess reserve holdings, they will be willing to lend those reserves out to
any creditworthy borrowers as long as the interest rate is positive after adjusting for risk. The
borrowers would then spend these monies, thereby boosting economic activity. The funds
would not disappear, but instead would flow back into the banking system as they were
deposited by those who had received the income generated by the increase in spending,
thus replenishing the reserves that had been lent out in the first round of lending. This would
result in a new stock of excess reserves that would then lead to a second round of credit
creation and a further increase in economic activity. This cycling of excess reserves into
credit creation, and the corresponding increase in economic activity, would continue until the
excess reserves were fully absorbed by an increase in currency outstanding and/or an
increase in required reserves associated with the rise in the amount of banking deposits.
Inflation would rise as the excessive credit creation generated by the excess reserves led to
an overheated economy and a rise in inflation expectations.
But that is not the world in which we now live. Because the Federal Reserve now has the
ability to pay interest on excess reserves (IOER), it also now has the ability to prevent excess
reserves from leading to excessive credit creation. Because the Federal Reserve is the
safest of counterparties, the IOER rate effectively becomes the risk-free rate. 3 By raising that
rate, the Federal Reserve raises the cost of credit more generally because banks will not
lend at rates below the IOER rate when they can instead hold their excess reserves on
deposit with the Fed. Because banks no longer seek to lend out their excess reserves, there
is no increase in the amount of credit outstanding, no redeposit of the excess reserves, no
increase in economic activity and no risk that excessive credit creation will fuel an inflationary
spiral.

2

That rate is unlikely to spur too much lending right now given the constraints on credit availability, but at some
future date it undoubtedly would be too low once the recovery is sufficiently advanced and credit conditions
improved.

3

For a more detailed discussion of monetary policy implementation under a regime in which the central bank
pays interest on reserves, see: Todd Keister, Antoine Martin, and James J. McAndrews (2008), "Divorcing
Money from Monetary Policy," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, Vol. 14 (2), 4156; and Todd Keister and James J. McAndrews (2009), "Why Are Banks Holding So Many Excess Reserves?"
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 380.

4

BIS Review 94/2009

For this dynamic to work correctly, the Federal Reserve needs to set an IOER rate consistent
with the amount of required reserves, money supply and credit outstanding consistent with its
dual mandate of full employment and price stability. If demand for credit exceeds what is
appropriate, the Federal Reserve raises the IOER rate to reduce demand. If the demand for
credit is insufficient to push the economy to full employment, then the Federal Reserve
reduces the IOER rate, recognizing that the IOER rate cannot fall below zero. This does not
differ much from how the Federal Reserve has behaved historically – set the fed funds rate
at a level consistent with the desired level of economic activity and inflation over time.
So how does the IOER rate relate to the fed funds rate? The two rates are likely to track
each other closely in most circumstances. 4 First, banks generally do not have any incentive
to sell fed funds at rates below the IOER rate. Only nondepository institutions – such as the
government sponsored enterprises (GSEs) – that can buy and sell fed funds but are not able
to hold excess reserves with the Fed, might have an incentive to sell fed funds at rates below
the IOER rate. But even in this case, the fed funds rate would not likely fall far below the
IOER rate. After all, if the fed funds rate were to fall significantly below the IOER rate, banks
could purchase the fed funds and hold them as reserves with the Fed, earning the difference.
The ability of banks to engage in arbitrage should limit the size of the deviations between the
IOER rate and the fed funds rate. Thus, through the IOER rate, the Federal Reserve can
effectively retain control of monetary policy.
In addition to paying interest on excess reserves, the Federal Reserve also has the ability to
drain the excess reserves from the banking system. This can be done in a variety of ways:
reverse repo transactions with dealers and other counterparties, securities sales from the
Fed’s portfolio or bill issuance by the Treasury, with the funds deposited at the Federal
Reserve. Although our ability to pay interest on excess reserves is sufficient to retain control
of monetary policy, it is not bad policy to have both a “belt and suspenders” in place. As a
result, we are working out ways to drain reserves to provide reassurance that we will not –
under any circumstance – lose control of monetary policy.
A related concern is the question of whether the Federal Reserve will be able to act quickly
enough once it determines that it is time to raise rates. This concern reflects the view that the
excess reserves sitting on banks’ balance sheets are essentially “dry tinder” that could
quickly fuel excessive credit creation and put the Fed behind the curve in tightening
monetary policy.
In terms of imagery, this concern seems compelling – the banks sitting on piles of money that
could be used to extend credit on a moment’s notice. However, this reasoning ignores a very
important point. Based on how monetary policy has been conducted for several decades,
banks have always had the ability to expand credit whenever they like. They don’t need a
pile of “dry tinder” in the form of excess reserves to do so. That is because the Federal
Reserve has committed itself to supply sufficient reserves to keep the fed funds rate at its
target. If banks want to expand credit and that drives up the demand for reserves, the Fed
automatically meets that demand in its conduct of monetary policy. In terms of the ability to
expand credit rapidly, it makes no difference whether the banks have lots of excess reserves
or not.
Another source of concern among some market participants has been the Federal Reserve’s
purchase of Treasury securities. The worry here is that the Federal Reserve’s purchases are
“monetizing the debt” and that therefore these purchases will ultimately prove inflationary.

4

In a world of excess reserves and a positive IOER, either the IOER or the fed funds rate could conceivably be
used as the primary instrument of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve would have precise control over the
IOER and this would lead to some variability in the actual fed funds rate. This would not be much of a
departure from the recent past in which the actual fed funds rate has tended to fluctuate closely around the fed
funds target.

BIS Review 94/2009

5

Regarding the Fed’s Treasury purchase program, I want to make two points. First, with the
fed funds rate constrained at zero lower bound, policymakers needed to find other ways to
stimulate economic activity. The agency debt and agency MBS purchase programs proved
effective in narrowing credit spreads in the debt and MBS market, but the Federal Reserve
would have encountered diminishing returns in terms of impaired market function if it had
raised the sizes of these two programs further. This suggested that the best course to hold
down mortgage rates and other private borrowing rates would be to engage in a Treasury
purchase program that would put downward pressure on Treasury rates. In this regard, the
Fed’s purchases have not been motivated by accommodating an expansive fiscal policy and
the large fiscal deficits that are its consequence. I can assure you that the Federal Reserve
will never engage in a program to accommodate or facilitate an unsustainable fiscal policy
program. Instead, these programs were designed to help ease financial conditions at a time
that the Federal Reserve could not push the fed funds rate below zero.
Second, the program is small. So even if one were to take a darker view of what the Federal
Reserve has done, it is important to put the purchase program in context. Even after
completion of a purchase program of up to $300 billion of Treasuries, the Federal Reserve’s
holdings of Treasuries will be smaller than they had been in August 2007 on the eve of the
crisis. Moreover, as a share of Treasuries outstanding, the Fed’s share will be the lowest
since the early 1990s.
Overall, the Federal Reserve’s balance-sheet expansion has had notable benefits. The asset
purchase programs have helped to keep longer-term private interest rates relatively low, and
the expansion of liquidity facilities has helped to restore more normal market function.
However, this does not mean that the Federal Reserve balance-sheet expansion and
Treasury purchase program are cost free, only that the benefits of these programs,
individually and collectively, are seen as exceeding the potential costs.
Nevertheless, there are three issues on the cost side that deserve note. First, policymakers
need to take seriously any concerns that the Fed’s actions might conceivably lead to an
inflation problem. After all, inflation is driven mainly by two variables – inflation expectations
and the degree of pressure on resources. It would be potentially very damaging if any of the
Fed’s programs were to unhinge inflation expectations. One risk with embarking on the
Treasury purchase program was that it had the potential to create the misperception that the
Fed was providing the fiscal authorities with the means to fund a more stimulative fiscal
policy than they would otherwise have been able to finance. This misperception around the
intent and purpose of the program could have undermined the Fed’s credibility and triggered
a damaging rise in inflation expectations. Indeed, one of my primary goals for this speech is
to make it clear that we have not compromised our ability or our commitment to keep inflation
in check. Keeping inflation and inflation expectations well anchored around a low level is
essential.
Second, the Federal Reserve’s balance-sheet expansion does have a consequence for the
balance sheet of the banking system. The increase in the amount of excess reserves has to
be held by banks. Excess reserves are a risk-free asset that they may not wish to hold. More
important, to the extent that the banks worry about their overall leverage ratios, it is possible
that a large increase in excess reserves could conceivably diminish the willingness of banks
to lend. At present, these balance-sheet issues do not appear to be having a meaningful
effect on bank behavior. In fact, the excess reserves serve as a liquidity buffer that many
banks find attractive in the current environment. But that does not mean we can ignore this
issue. We need to keep this issue in mind as we contemplate how much balance-sheet
expansion might be appropriate.
Third, the Federal Reserve is taking on some interest-rate risk in terms of its balance sheet.
The excess reserves have an overnight maturity. These liabilities are being used to purchase
longer-term assets. In principle, if short-term interest rates were to move up very sharply, the

6

BIS Review 94/2009

cost of funding could eventually exceed the return on the Fed’s assets. The bigger our
balance sheet, the greater the amount of interest-rate risk we are assuming.
We have examined this issue in detail. Suffice it to say, it is conceivable that the Federal
Reserve’s net-interest margin could be pinched in certain environments – say if the economic
recovery turned out to be very robust. But our analysis shows that it is extremely unlikely that
the Fed’s net-interest margin will turn negative. In part, that is due to the fact that the
balance-sheet risk associated with the interest-rate mismatch is offset to a large degree by
the fact that the cost of much of the Fed’s liabilities – the amount of currency outstanding – is
zero. So when short-term rates rise, the cost of a significant portion of the Fed’s liabilities is
unaffected.
Making policy during a crisis involves making tough choices. Perfect solutions are not always
achievable or even legally feasible. I can assure you that our decisions have been made
carefully, always with an eye toward finding the right balance between the risks and rewards
of alternative options. Most critical is our commitment never to take actions that might
compromise our ability to retain our control of monetary policy and that might undermine our
ability to achieve our dual mandate of full employment and price stability.
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be very happy to take a few questions.

BIS Review 94/2009

7

William C Dudley: A bit better, but very far from best – US economic
outlook and the challenges facing the Federal Reserve
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Fordham Corporate Law Center Lecture, New York, 5
October 2009.
*

*

*

Thank you for having me here to speak today. It is a real pleasure to have this opportunity to
discuss the economic outlook and the challenges that face the Federal Reserve in terms of
monetary policy going forward. As always, my remarks reflect my own views and opinions
and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve
System.
My assessment of where things stand today is mixed. On the positive side, the financial
markets are performing better and the economy is now recovering. In fact, the improvement
in financial conditions has caused usage of the Fed’s special liquidity facilities to fall
considerably. Consistent with their design, these facilities have become relatively less
attractive as market conditions have improved. Also, the Federal Reserve has begun to taper
its rate of asset purchases. The Treasury purchase program will end this month and the
agency MBS purchase program by the end of the first quarter of 2010.
On the negative side, the unemployment rate is much too high and it seems likely that the
recovery will be less robust than desired. This means that the economy has significant
excess slack and implies that we face meaningful downside risks to inflation over the next
year or two. Also, there are those who express anxiety about whether the Fed has the tools
and the will to raise the federal funds rate when the time is appropriate. I want to assure you
that the Fed has the tools to tighten monetary policy regardless the size of its balance sheet.
Moreover, we have the will to do so in order to keep inflation in check.
Turning first to the developments in financial markets, there is little doubt that we have seen
a vast improvement over the past six months. The major equity indices have risen sharply,
credit spreads have narrowed and bank equity prices have generally shown a substantial
recovery. Many large financial and nonfinancial firms have found it relatively easy again to
tap the debt and equity markets.
The recovery in financial asset prices has been mirrored – albeit with a lag – in the economy.
Industrial production has begun to rebound as the pace of inventory liquidation has slowed.
Housing prices and activity have recovered somewhat – aided by the improvement in
housing affordability and the first-time homebuyer tax credit. Fiscal stimulus is providing
support to consumption and to state and local infrastructure spending.
The vicious cycle we had a year ago – in which the deterioration in financial markets led to
economic weakness and that weakness reinforced the tightening of financial conditions – has
been broken. In fact, to some extent, it has been replaced with a virtuous cycle. As financial
markets have recovered, that has led to an improvement in business and consumer
sentiment that, in turn, has helped to lift the economy, spurring further gains in financial asset
prices.
In the same way that the improvement in market conditions is helping to support a
sustainable economic recovery, the fact that the recovery in economic activity is a world-wide
phenomenon helps mitigate the risk of a so-called “double-dip.” The recovery in foreign
demand should help to support the U.S. economy even if U.S. domestic demand grows more
slowly than anticipated. Given these developments, the consensus forecast of about 3
percent annualized real GDP growth in the second half of the year appears reasonable.

BIS Review 122/2009

1

However, I also suspect that the recovery will turn out to be moderate by historical standards.
This is a disappointing outcome in that growth will likely not be strong enough to bring the
unemployment rate – currently 9.8 percent – down quickly.
I see three major forces restraining the pace of this recovery. First, households are unlikely
to have fully adjusted to the net wealth shock that has been generated by the housing price
decline and the weakness in share prices. Peak to trough, home prices nationwide have
declined by 11.5 percent measured by the FHFA (Federal Housing Finance Agency) index
and by 32 percent according to the 20-city Case-Shiller index. With respect to stock prices,
the S&P 500 index has recovered by more than 50 percent from the trough reached in
March. But this should be put in context. The S&P 500 index is still about one-third below its
recent peak in October 2007. Moreover, compared with its level ten years ago, the S&P 500
index is down by about 20 percent.
The shock to household net worth seems likely to have several important implications for
household behavior. The shock creates a risk that the household saving rate could increase
further. For example, during the period from 1990 to 1992, the household saving rate
averaged about 7 percent of disposable personal income, considerably higher than the 4.3
percent average rate during the first half of this year. If the household saving rate were to
rise, then consumption would rise more slowly than income, making it more difficult for the
economy to develop strong forward momentum. In addition, it seems likely that some
workers will respond to the wealth shock by postponing their retirement. This suggests that
the labor force participation rate may rise once labor market conditions improve. This would
tend to push up the unemployment rate, all else being equal.
The second force that could restrain the recovery is the fiscal outlook. The fiscal stimulus that
is currently providing support to economic activity is temporary rather than permanent. This
has to be the case if we are to ensure that fiscal policy is on a sustainable path over the longrun. This means that the positive impulse from fiscal stimulus will abate over the next year.
The third, and perhaps most important factor, is that the banking system has still not fully
recovered. Bank credit losses lag the business cycle and are still climbing. Thus, while
banks’ access to the capital markets has sharply improved, banks are still capital constrained
and hesitant to expand their lending. Most importantly, some significant classes of borrowers
– namely commercial real estate and small business – are almost wholly dependent on the
banking sector for funds, and those funds are not easily forthcoming.
The commercial real estate sector is under particular pressure because the fundamentals of
the sector have deteriorated sharply and because the sector is highly dependent upon bank
lending. In terms of the fundamentals, there are two problems. First, the capitalization rate –
the ratio of income to valuation – has climbed sharply. At the peak, capitalization rates for
prime properties were in the range of 5 percent. That means that investors were willing to
pay $20 for a $1 of income. Today, the capitalization rate appears to have risen to about 8
percent. That means that the same dollar of income is now capitalized as worth only $12.50.
In other words, if income were stable, the value of the properties would have fallen by 37.5
percent. Second, the income generated by commercial real estate has generally been falling.
For example, as the recession has pushed up the unemployment rate, the demand for office
building space has declined; as the recession has led to a reduction in discretionary travel,
hotel occupancy rates and room prices have declined; and as retail sales have weakened,
this has reduced the demand for prime retail property space.
The decline in commercial real estate valuations has created a significant amount of “rollover
risk” when commercial real estate loans and mortgages mature and need to be refinanced.
The slump in valuations pushes up loan-to-value ratios. This makes lenders wary about
extending new credit, even in the case when these loans are performing on a cash flow
basis. This means that more pain likely lies ahead for this sector and for those banks with
heavy commercial real estate exposures.

2

BIS Review 122/2009

For small business borrowers, there are three problems. First, the fundamentals of their
businesses have often deteriorated because of the length and severity of the recession –
making many less creditworthy. Second, some sources of funding for small businesses –
credit card borrowing and home equity loans – have dried up as banks have responded to
rising credit losses in these areas by tightening credit standards. Third, small businesses
have few alternative sources of funds. They are too small to borrow in the capital markets
and the Small Business Administration programs are not large enough to accommodate
more than a small fraction of the demand from this sector.
All of these factors will tend to inhibit the pace of the economic recovery. Given that the
recovery is starting with an abnormally large amount of slack, and the pace of recovery is not
likely to be robust, this means the economy is likely to have significant excess resources for
some time to come. As a result, the balance of risks to inflation lies on the downside, not the
upside, at least for the next year or two.
To see why this is the case, it is useful to note that inflation dynamics are mainly driven by
two factors – the degree of capital and labor resource utilization relative to sustainable levels,
and long-run inflation expectations. The degree of resource utilization is essentially driven by
the business cycle and, and to some extent, by the Fed’s success in achieving the
“maximum sustainable growth” component of its dual mandate. Inflation expectations, on the
other hand, are driven by a combination of actual inflation outcomes and the credibility of the
central bank’s commitment to price stability. If inflation is low and the central bank is credible,
then long-run inflation expectations are likely to remain well anchored.
In practice, the relationship between the inflation rate and the level of resource utilization is
very difficult to estimate accurately. This stems, in part, from the fact that the data on inflation
and resource utilization are “noisy” and because sustainable levels of resource utilization are
not directly unobservable. The fact is that there is often not much resource slack in the
economy also makes it hard to discern a clear empirical relationship.
Unfortunately, in this episode, we don't need a precise estimate of slack to be highly
confident that the level of slack in the labor market is at or above the record of the post-World
War II period. Although the headline unemployment rate of 9.8 percent is about one
percentage point below its level at the end of the 1981-82 recession, other, more indicative
measures paint a bleaker picture. For example, the prime age male unemployment rate is at
a record high, by a significant margin. The labor market data released last Friday showed the
September value at 10.4 percent, an increase of 6.5 percentage points from the start of the
recession. In contrast, in the 1981-82 recession the prime age male unemployment rate
peaked at 9.3 percent, rising by 4.2 percentage points from the start of that recession.
Over the post-World War II period as a whole, it was only in the wake of the 1981-82 and
1990-91 recessions that the prime age male unemployment rate remained above 6 percent
for more than just a few months. In addition, during all post-war expansions, the prime age
male unemployment rate has fallen below 5 percent, even during the short expansion of
1980-81. Currently, even under very optimistic forecasts for the economy, it appears very
unlikely that the prime age male unemployment rate will dip below 6 percent before 2011.
Alongside the current unusually high degree of labor market slack, we have a situation in
which core inflation levels are low by historical standards. Continuing the comparison with
the recession of 1981-82, it is worth noting that the core inflation rate today is almost 5
percentage points lower than it was toward the end of that episode. In addition, historical
experience shows that the slack generated during a recession typically pushes core inflation
lower in the early stages of recovery. So far, this cycle looks little different. As the degree of
slack in the economy has climbed over the past year, measures of core inflation, particularly
of core services inflation, have moderated. The tendency for service price movements to be
persistent, coupled with the current unusually large amount of slack in the economy,
suggests that the core inflation rate is more likely to fall than it is to rise over the next 12 to
18 months.

BIS Review 122/2009

3

In summary, I believe the current balance of risks around the inflation outlook lie to the
downside due to the very low level of resource utilization and the fact that long-run inflation
expectations remain stable. This balance of risks is problematic because the current level of
inflation is already so low – the core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) deflator has
increased only 1.3 percent over the past 12 months. Thus, we would not need much of a
decline in inflation to run the risk of an outright deflation. Outright deflation, in turn, would be
a dangerous development because it would drive up real debt burdens and make it much
more difficult for households and businesses to deleverage.
So what are the implications of all this for monetary policy?
The first implication is that the federal funds rate target is likely to remain exceptionally low
for “an extended period.” The desired policy outcome is a robust recovery in the context of
price stability.
The second implication is that the Federal Reserve needs to ensure that market participants
and the public understand that the FOMC has the tools to exit smoothly from the very low
federal funds rate, and that it stands ready to do so when the time comes. On this point, let
me be perfectly clear: An enlarged balance sheet and the high level of excess reserves in the
banking system will not delay or prevent a timely exit.
The angst about the Fed’s ability to exit smoothly stems from the rapid growth of its balance
sheet over the past year. In September 2008, on the eve of Lehman Brothers’ failure, the
consolidated Federal Reserve balance sheet was about $900 billion. Today it is about $2.15
trillion, and it is likely to peak at around $2.5 trillion early next year.
Some observers are concerned that this expansion will ultimately prove to be inflationary.
Proponents of this view say that the monetary base, the broad monetary aggregates, and
total credit outstanding have historically tended to move together with inflation, at least over
longer time periods. Thus, if the monetary base is growing rapidly, as it has been over the
past year with the growth in the Fed’s balance sheet, the argument is that this growth will
ultimately lead to inflation.
This concern is not well founded because the Federal Reserve now has the ability to pay
interest on excess reserves (IOER), and this tool allows us to prevent excess reserves from
leading to excessive credit creation. It works as follows. Because the Federal Reserve is the
safest of counterparties, the IOER rate effectively becomes the risk-free rate. By raising that
rate, the Federal Reserve raises the cost of credit because banks will not lend at rates below
the IOER when they can instead hold these excess reserves on deposit with the Fed.
Because banks no longer seek to lend out their excess reserves, there is no increase in the
amount of credit outstanding, no increase in economic activity and no risk that excessive
credit creation will fuel an inflationary spiral.
In the event that the ability to pay interest on excess reserves for any reason proved
insufficient or the excess reserves themselves had unanticipated side effects that the Fed
wished to mitigate, we are developing a number of tools that can be used to drain reserves.
Two such tools are large reverse repos with dealers and other investors and term deposit
facilities for banks.
Finally, the Federal Reserve could always drain reserves the old-fashioned way, by selling
assets. The vast bulk of the Fed’s portfolio is highly liquid – currently we hold $769 billion of
Treasury securities, $692 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, and $131 billion of
agency debt against about $900 billion of excess reserves. All the excess reserves could be
mopped up by asset sales alone if that proved necessary.
The Federal Reserve has been very aggressive in responding to the financial crisis. We have
rolled out numerous new liquidity facilities and have engaged in lending activity under
Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act for the first time since the Great Depression. These
actions have been successful in mitigating the risks of financial collapse and a more severe

4

BIS Review 122/2009

contraction in economic activity. The financial system is now healthier and the economy is
recovering.
But despite these successes, we need to be clear that what has happened to our financial
system and the economy is wholly unsatisfactory, and that a broad range of regulatory
policies and practices need to be recalibrated to address the shortcomings of our financial
system. With inflation low and long-run inflation expectations stable, and our ability to remove
monetary accommodation in a timely manner intact, our near-term focus should be to keep
significant monetary accommodation in place for an extended period in order to achieve our
dual objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be very happy to take a few questions.

BIS Review 122/2009

5

William C Dudley: Some lessons from the crisis
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Institute of International Bankers Membership Luncheon,
New York, 13 October 2009.
*

*

*

Thank you for having me here to speak today. It is a real pleasure to have this opportunity to
discuss the challenges ahead in making our banking and financial system more resilient and
robust. We have learned a great deal over the past two years about our financial system and
its vulnerabilities. The challenge ahead is to put these lessons to good use.
Regulators and market participants failed to fully appreciate the degree to which the various
aspects of our financial system are interconnected, and to foresee what those tight linkages
would mean for market function when even one reasonably large institution – let alone many
– became distressed. We also did not fully appreciate the strength of the amplifying
mechanisms that were built into our financial system; the consequence of which was to
exacerbate the boom on the way up and worsen the bust on the way down. Contributing to
these pro-cyclical dynamics were inadequate incentives for firms to curb their risk-taking and
to more effectively manage the risks they did face. The inadequate level of transparency and
disclosure, particularly in the market for structured products, were also important in making
the financial system more fragile and vulnerable to crisis and in increasing the degree of
uncertainty and contagion once the crisis was underway. Only by fully understanding these
shortcomings can we construct solutions that will strengthen our financial system and make it
more robust.
The initiatives underway to strengthen our financial system span a wide range of supervisory
and regulatory policy areas, including ongoing efforts to improve standards for both the
capital and liquidity held by financial institutions, efforts to improve the risk management
practices at financial institutions and efforts to strengthen the resiliency of market
infrastructures. Today, I am going to focus mainly on the need to improve the capital
standards for large, systemically important financial institutions.
For initiatives in this area to be effective, we need to make progress on three distinct, but
related fronts:
•

a more thorough and complete risk capture so that the capital adequacy rules more
effectively encompass a broader set of risk exposures than before,

•

rules that encourage the conservation of capital in adverse economic and financial
circumstances, and

•

tougher regulatory requirements, including the use of a contingent capital instrument
that would automatically replenish equity capital in times of stress.

As always, my remarks reflect my own views and opinions and not necessarily those of the
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
Interconnectedness
This financial crisis has exposed how important the interconnections are among the banking
system, capital markets, and payment and settlement systems. For example, the recent
disruption in the functioning of the securitization markets caused by the poor performance of
highly-rated debt securities, led to significant problems for major financial institutions. Banks
had to take assets back on their books; backstop lines of credit were triggered; and banks
could no longer securitize loans, increasing the pressure on their balance sheets. This

BIS Review 125/2009

1

reduced credit availability, which increased the downward pressure on economic activity,
which caused asset values to decline further, increasing the degree of stress in the financial
system.
This interconnectedness implies that regulation and risk management practices that focus
only on individual parts of the system will inevitably fail to address important vulnerabilities
elsewhere. Thus, we have to make widespread changes in how we approach supervision
and regulation, particularly in the context of our most systemically important financial
institutions.
First, although supervision cannot lose its vertical perspective, looking firm by firm or region
by region, it also must place more emphasis than before on gaining a horizontal perspective
– looking broadly across banks, securities firms and other types of financial institutions, and
across markets and geographies.
Second, the supervision of our financial institutions and the regulation of markets need to be
risk focused, coordinated and multi-disciplinary. In thinking about the best way to introduce
these practices into our system, we should not kid ourselves about how difficult this will be to
execute. It will take the right people, with the right skill sets, operating in a system with the
right culture, tools and legal framework. The governance process surrounding systemic risk
regulation will have to be extremely flexible and dynamic, able to identify important
vulnerabilities as they emerge and able to act on those concerns in a timely manner.
System dynamics
Over the course of this crisis, it has become evident that our system has some powerful
reinforcing mechanisms built into it. This suggests that one important focus of regulation
should be on how to change the system in order to eliminate or at least mitigate those
destructive dynamics. Let me give you a few examples.
In times of stress, banks may have incentives to continue to pay dividends to show they are
strong even when they are not. This behavior depletes the bank’s capital and makes the
bank weaker. To correct this shortcoming in our system, we should craft policies that either
incent or require weak and vulnerable firms to cut dividends quickly in order to conserve
capital. This would introduce a dampening mechanism into our system.
Another example of a reinforcing mechanism is a situation in which firms have incentives to
structure activities to minimize regulatory capital or other requirements without transferring
risk. Creation of off-balance sheet funding vehicles, structured products and complex
corporate structures to minimize regulatory requirements and tax obligations reduces
transparency, introduces new risks and limits the effectiveness of resolution regimes.
Other examples of reinforcing mechanisms in our system are:
•

Collateral tied to credit ratings. Credit downgrades lead to increased collateral calls,
which drain liquidity, forcing asset sales, further weakening the firm subject to the
collateral calls.

•

Collateral and haircuts. When volatility rises and that leads to increased haircuts, the
result can be a vicious cycle of forced asset sales, higher volatility and still higher
haircuts.

•

Compensation tied to short-term revenue generation, rather than long-term
profitability over the cycle. This causes risk-takers to take on too much risk because
they are compensated on the upside. This risk-taking extends the boom, setting the
stage for a bigger bust.

Although some of these practices might appear sensible from the narrow perspective of an
individual firm or market, this crisis has shown us that when all firms or market participants
simultaneously take an action that appears to be in their immediate, narrow interest, the

2

BIS Review 125/2009

collective impact on the system as a whole can be disastrous. We need to find ways to
weaken or eliminate these reinforcing mechanisms and we need to introduce new
dampening mechanisms into the financial system.
Incentives
Some of the pro-cyclical dynamics embedded in our financial system occur because market
participants do not always have the incentive to behave in ways that will be good for the
system as a whole. This occurs, in part, because market participants often do not have to
bear the full costs of their actions. For example, the incentive to take on more risk without
regard for the broader implications of those actions arises from a number of factors, including
poorly constructed compensation schemes, ineffective risk management and gaps in
regulatory oversight and risk capture.
One problem evident during the crisis has been the reluctance of banking organizations to
raise sufficient capital to be able to credibly have the resources to withstand particularly
adverse economic conditions. This reluctance stemmed, in part, from concerns about what a
capital raise would signal about the firm’s strength, but it also stemmed from an
unwillingness to unnecessarily dilute shareholders. The reluctance led to more uncertainty
about the adequacy of banks’ capital positions, which, in turn increased concerns about
counterparty credit risk. These worries led to a further deterioration in market liquidity. These
dynamics tightened financial market and credit conditions, increasing the downward pressure
on economic activity and on the financial system.
The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) exercise that we undertook in the
United States leaned against this. By forcing all of the banks that participated in the SCAP to
have sufficient capital to help them withstand a stress environment, this process improved
confidence and increased the willingness of banks to engage with each other. It also made it
easier for the banks to be able to tap the capital markets. The SCAP exercise made a bad
state of the world less likely, helping to create a virtuous circle rather than a vicious one.
The SCAP exercise was developed and conducted in response to the crisis and a specific
need. Now, we need to figure out how to conduct these types of exercises on a systematic
basis. Such exercises may even need to be hardwired into the supervisory oversight of the
financial system.
Transparency
In some critical segments of our financial markets, both before and during the crisis, limited
or ineffective disclosure undermined market discipline and this contributed to the
accumulation of risk. In the years leading up to the crisis, the lack of transparency
contributed to increased risk and leverage in off-balance sheet vehicles, structured credit
products and in over-the-counter securities such as asset-backed securities (ABS),
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), residential mortgage-backed securities
(RMBS) and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and their associated derivatives. Once
the crisis was underway, the opacity of many of these vehicles, structures and securities
contributed to the concerns about counterparty credit risk. This uncertainty exacerbated the
erosion in market liquidity conditions and further intensified the crisis.
This lack of transparency was present in a number of different places:
•

Valuation. CDOs and other securitized obligations were complex and difficult to
value. This reduced liquidity, pushed down prices and increased uncertainty about
the solvency of institutions holding these assets.

BIS Review 125/2009

3

•

Prices. The lack of pricing information led to a loss of confidence about accounting
marks. Sometimes identical securities were valued differently at different financial
institutions.

•

Concentration of risk. Because there was no detailed reporting of exposures, market
participants did not know much about the concentration of risk. This led to a
reluctance to engage with counterparties, which, in turn, pushed up spreads and
reduced liquidity further.

Regulatory reform
These four strands – understanding interconnectedness, mitigating pro-cyclical system
dynamics, improving incentives and increasing transparency – should be critical areas of
focus in our efforts to enhance the resiliency of the banking and financial system. We will do
this through several channels, including international regulatory reform, enhanced capital
requirements, the introduction of common liquidity standards and clear expectations for
compensation practices. Today I am going to spend some time talking about how we might
take account of these strands to ensure that our regulatory capital regime helps to facilitate a
more robust and stable financial system.
In my view, the regulatory capital framework would benefit from four changes:
•

Improving the risk capture associated with the capital requirements.

•

Introduction of rules that ensure the conservation of capital during times of economic
and financial distress.

•

Imposition of higher capital requirements for systemically important institutions.

•

Development of efficient forms of capital. In particular, contingent capital debt
instruments that are convertible into common equity if a bank’s share price were to
fall precipitously.

Capital requirements with improved risk capture
The recent financial crisis has shown that parts of the regulatory capital framework were not
calibrated properly to account for the most complex instruments. Our efforts to revise the
capital rules should emphasize the need to include these and other risks that were not
appropriately captured in recent years.
In many circumstances, an emphasis on improved risk-capture may be superior to simply
raising the capital requirements across the board. There are two reasons for this. First, it may
better tie capital to the risks being undertaken. This, in turn, would create more appropriate
incentives for risk-taking. Second, it may reduce the risk of regulatory arbitrage. If the risks of
some activities are not captured properly, then banks will have incentives to shift their
business toward those particular activities.
The Basel Committee has made very good progress in revising the capital treatment of
trading book positions and for structured credit products – two areas where the crisis
revealed critical weaknesses in the regulatory capital regime. Revisions to the capital
requirements for over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives exposures as proposed by the Obama
administration also strike me as appropriate. Not only would this more effectively capture the
risks that banks are taking, but it also would create incentives to move the trading and
settlement of such instruments more rapidly to central clearing parties (CCPs) and to
exchanges. The greater use of CCPs and exchanges should have several benefits, including
reduction of risk through the multilateral netting of exposures and improved transparency
with respect to the structure and pricing for such instruments.

4

BIS Review 125/2009

Capital conservation
More explicit supervisory standards regarding capital conservation would also be an
important element of an efficient capital regime. During the crisis, some banks continued to
pay out dividends even though their condition and market valuation metrics had sharply
deteriorated. Banks did this to try to convince investors that their bank was “sound.” But by
depleting capital, these actions made banks and the financial system weaker.
To mitigate these dynamics, regulators could require the reduction and possibly the
cessation of dividend payments and share buybacks during adverse market environments
when particular triggers were breached. For example, limits on dividend payments and share
repurchases as a share of earnings could be mandated to occur when common equity ratios
fell below certain levels (recognizing that credit and mark-to-market losses deplete the capital
structure from below) or when market-based measures hit certain trigger values. Taking
away the discretion of banks to deplete capital would strengthen the banks’ ability to
withstand adverse environments.
In principle, such constraints could conceivably be extended to compensation and bonus
payments. Some of the firms that encountered difficulties in 2008 paid out large bonuses
early in 2008 despite the deterioration in market conditions and in their own financial
performance. There is an opportunity to rethink capital preservation policies to ensure that
banks’ incentives are consistent with the supervisory objectives of a safe and sound banking
system.
Such capital conservation rules could operate on both sides of an economic downturn –
conserving capital going into the downturn and rebuilding capital coming out. One example
would be the imposition of constraints on the ability of banks to reinstate or increase
dividends prematurely or to undertake share buybacks during a downturn or during the early
stages of an economic recovery.
Higher capital requirement for systemically important institutions
Currently, some large systemically important institutions may have a competitive advantage
because they are perceived to be “too big to fail.” Unless we address this disparity, we will
have an ongoing moral hazard problem and inevitable market structure distortions as
institutions take steps to become systemically important in order to gain a competitive
advantage.
The regulatory regime could lean against this in two ways. First, we could improve the
resolution mechanisms for large, complex institutions and thereby reduce the costs
associated with failure. A more robust resolution regime would make it more feasible to allow
the failure of a large financial institution without that failure threatening the stability of the
entire financial system. Second, we could impose higher capital requirements on large,
systemically important institutions to offset the advantages such as lower funding costs that
these institutions may garner by their perceived “too big to fail” status. This would recognize
the interconnectedness of the financial system and the fact that the failure of a systemically
important institution generates significant externalities, which are not, at present, borne fully
by the equity and debt holders of such institutions. Increasing the size of the capital buffer
would make the system more stable by reducing the incentive for firms to get big just to
capture the perceived benefits from achieving “too big to fail” status.
The first change – an improved resolution mechanism – would presumably reduce the
number of institutions that – at any point in time – would be systemically important. The
second change – the imposition of higher capital requirements on large, systemically
important institutions – would reduce the likelihood of failure of such institutions.
However, in assessing the efficacy of such changes, we need to be realistic about the
difficulties in building a resolution regime that would be sufficiently robust to allow the failure
of any institution under any circumstance and in designing a capital regime that imposes

BIS Review 125/2009

5

differential requirements on large, systemically important institutions. On the resolution
regime side of the ledger, it is particularly difficult to build resolution regimes that can operate
effectively across different geographic jurisdictions. Legal regimes are different; national
authorities have different incentives; and coordinating resolution across multiple geographies
in a way that treated counterparties in different jurisdictions equivalently would be a daunting
mission.
Similarly, designing an effective capital surcharge for systemically important institutions will
be very challenging. Broadly, there are two approaches. We could either require a set of
firms identified to be systemically important to hold additional capital or we could introduce a
capital surcharge for firms linked to measures of systemic risk. In broad terms, the factors
that could be used to identify systemically important financial institutions would be related to
a firm’s interdependence with the financial system and the impact on market confidence
should the firm become distressed. Measures of size, leverage, liability structure and
importance in credit formation and liquidity provision could all be indicators of systemic
importance.
Developing a consistent, objective set of measures either to size a capital surcharge or to
identify such firms is particularly difficult. For example, introducing a single measure to size a
capital surcharge such as firm size, may create arbitrage opportunities and will almost
certainly not capture the full extent that an individual firm may contribute to systemic risk.
Moreover, identifying a set of systemically important institutions may reinforce concerns
about moral hazard. We also have the difficulty that the particular metrics used to determine
which firms are systemically important are likely to change over time with changes in market
structure and in the evolution of particular financial institutions.
Contingent capital
An ideal capital requirement regime should be efficient and should create the proper
incentives for banking organizations to internalize the costs of their actions on the broader
financial system and macroeconomy. Efficiency, which I’ll define here as minimizing the
amount and cost of capital needed to ensure solvency under adverse conditions, is important
because an inefficient system will inevitably encourage growth in activity outside the
regulatory regime, and will likely drive up the overall cost of intermediation. Proper incentives
are needed to control risk and better align the interests of management and shareholders
with those of the public.
In both respects, the introduction of a contingent capital instrument seems likely to hold real
promise. Relative to simply raising capital requirements, contingent capital has the potential
to be more efficient because the capital arrives as equity only in the bad states of the world
when it is needed. It also has the benefit of improving incentives by creating two-way risk for
bank managements and shareholders. If the bank encounters difficulties, triggering
conversion, shareholders would be automatically and immediately diluted. This would create
strong incentives for bank managements to manage not only for good outcomes on the
upside of the boom, but also against bad outcomes on the downside.
Conceptually, contingent capital instruments would be debt instruments in “good” states of
the world, but would convert into common equity at pre-specified trigger levels in “bad” states
of the world. In principle, these triggers could be tied to deterioration in the condition of the
specific banking institution and/or to the banking system as a whole.
There are many issues that would need to be worked out regarding how best to design such
instruments, including how to determine their share of total capital as well as how to
configure and publicly disclose the conversion terms and trigger. But, in my view, allowing
firms to issue contingent capital instruments that could be used to augment their common
equity capital during a downturn may be a more straightforward and efficient way to achieve
a countercyclical regulatory capital regime compared to trying to structure minimum

6

BIS Review 125/2009

regulatory capital requirements (or capital buffers above those requirements) that decline as
conditions in the financial sector worsen.
So what might such a contingent capital instrument look like? One possibility is a debt
instrument that is convertible into common shares if and only if the performance of the bank
deteriorates sharply. While, in principal, this could be tied solely to regulatory measures of
capital, it might work better tied to market-based measures because market-based measures
tend to lead regulatory-based measures. Also, if tied to market-based measures, there would
be greater scope for adjustment of the conversion terms in a way to make the instruments
more attractive to investors and, hence, lower cost capital instruments to the issuer. The
conversion terms could be generous to the holder of the contingent capital instrument. For
example, one might want to set the conversion terms so that the debt holders could expect to
get out at or close to whole – at par value. This is important because it would reduce the cost
of the contingent instrument, making it a considerably cheaper form of capital than common
equity.
Consider the advantages that such an instrument would have had during this crisis. Rather
than banks clumsily evaluating whether to cut dividends, raise common equity and/or
conduct exchanges of common equity for preferred shares and market participants uncertain
about the willingness and ability of firms to complete such transactions and successfully raise
new capital, contingent capital would have been converted automatically into common equity
when market triggers were hit.
If these contingent capital buffers were large, which they could be because the cost of these
instruments should not differ much from straight debt, then the worst aspects of the banking
crisis might have been averted. If shareholders had faced the potential of automatic and
substantial dilution, they may have demanded better risk management and disclosure during
the boom. If common equity had been automatically bolstered during the early part of crisis,
investors would have been much less concerned about the risk of insolvency. Counterparty
risk concerns would have been much less significant – potentially short-circuiting one of the
important amplifying mechanisms of the crisis. Such instruments could have reduced the
likelihood of failure of large, systemically important institutions, reducing the significance of
the “too big to fail” problem and its associated moral hazard problems.
Harmonized standards
The Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee are working hard and are making
important progress on all these issues. But for these efforts to bear fruit, it is critical that the
requirements that are imposed in terms of capital adequacy, liquidity and compensation be
harmonized across regulatory regimes and applied in a consistent fashion. The absence of a
level playing field would be a recipe for disaster.
A lack of harmonized standards would inevitably lead to balkanization and protectionism as
different countries took steps to protect their particular banking champions. Potentially, this
could lead to countries requiring capital and liquidity to be segregated locally. This would
have a number of negative consequences. First and foremost, it could disrupt the ability for
capital to flow freely across borders, interfering and inhibiting globalization in terms of
financial intermediation. Second, it would reduce the diversification benefits that stem from
banks that operate in different geographic locations. Third, it could undermine the safety and
soundness of the financial system. In particular, the lack of harmonization in terms of
regulatory regimes could lead to a “race to the bottom” as firms and businesses migrated to
the most lax regulatory regime.
So what does this mean for my audience today – foreign banks operating in the United
States? First, these institutions should not expect a return to “business as usual.” We are
committed to implementing the reforms that will prevent a recurrence of the recent financial
crisis.

BIS Review 125/2009

7

Second, as most of the current reform agenda of the Financial Stability Board and the Basel
Committee relates to the regulatory framework as applied by your home country, we expect
that foreign banks’ operations in the United States will fully comply with these structures as
they are put in place in their home country as well.
Third, we support the continued international banking presence of global banking institutions.
National implementation must not jeopardize the economic benefits derived from crossborder banking. We need to be wary about nationalistic approaches to supervision.
Fourth, financial firms that operate in our markets should continue to be vigilant in meeting
the expectations we have for strong risk management and compliance practices. It wasn’t too
long ago that some foreign banking organizations faced supervisory discipline for failing to
meet those standards. Given the lessons of the crisis, I would expect that our focus and
attention on these areas would only intensify going forward.
Fifth, we will be particularly focused on how the new supervisory framework will apply to the
U.S. personnel associated with the operations of foreign banks in the United States. In
particular, we will have substantial concern if these firms’ compensation practices are
contrary to the text or spirit of the international agreements on compensation practices that
are in the process of being hammered out. For example, multi-year guaranteed bonus
payments would raise a red flag for us as not likely being consistent with the evolving
consensus on sound compensation practices.
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions.

8

BIS Review 125/2009

William C Dudley: More lessons from the crisis
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Center for Economic Policy Studies (CEPS) Symposium,
Princeton, New Jersey, 13 November 2009.
*

*

*

Thank you for having me here to speak today. It is a real pleasure to have this opportunity to
speak at CEPS again – this is a great forum to talk about policy issues. Tonight I want to
discuss some of the challenges we face in making our financial system more robust. We
have learned a great deal over the past two years about our financial system and its
vulnerabilities. The task ahead is to put these lessons to good use. Our goal must be to
make the financial system more resilient to shocks. If we can do that successfully, we should
be able to reduce the risk of financial crises.
In assessing the causes of this crisis, one clear culprit was the failure of regulators and
market participants alike to fully appreciate the strength of the amplifying mechanisms that
were built into our financial system. These mechanics exacerbated the boom on the way up
and the bust on the way down. Only by better understanding the sources of these damaging
dynamics can we construct solutions that will strengthen our financial system and make it
more robust.
Today, I am going to focus mainly on the extraordinary liquidity events that played out during
this crisis. I will tackle this topic in four parts. I will begin by describing how funding dried up
rapidly for firms such as Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and AIG. I then will propose a
conceptual framework that might prove helpful in better understanding what went wrong on
the liquidity front. With this conceptual framework in hand, I will then suggest some concrete
steps we might take toward making the financial system more resilient – cautioning that there
are no magic bullets. Finally, I will talk about the major initiatives that are already underway
to help reduce the risk of future liquidity crises.
As always, my remarks reflect my own views and opinions and not necessarily those of the
Federal Reserve System.
At its most fundamental level, this crisis was caused by the rapid growth of the so-called
shadow banking system over the past few decades and its remarkable collapse over the past
two years. Let me give you some figures to illustrate the disparity between the growth of what
I will call the “traditional” commercial banking system and the shadow banking system in
recent years. At the end of 2006, the shadow banking system had grown so large that U.S.
commercial banks’ share of credit market assets had fallen to only 17.7 percent, down from
27.3 percent in 1980.
With this shift in the composition of activity also came an important change in the
composition of funding, particularly in the middle part of this decade. Commercial paper
outstanding grew from $1.3 trillion at the end of 2003 to a peak of about $2.3 trillion. Repo
funding by dealers to nonbank financial institutions – as measured by the reverse repos on
primary dealer balance sheets – grew from less than $1.3 trillion to a peak of nearly $2.8
trillion over this period. In contrast, commercial bank retail deposits rose by less than 30% in
the four year period from 2003 to 2007.
Though the shadow banking system was often credited with better distributing risk and
improving the overall efficiency of the financial system, this system ultimately proved to be
much more fragile than we had anticipated. Like the traditional banking system, the shadow
banking system engaged in the maturity transformation process in which structured
investment vehicles (SIVs), conduits, dealers, and hedge funds financed long-term assets
with short-term funding. However, much of the maturity transformation in the shadow system

BIS Review 143/2009

1

occurred without the types of stabilizing backstops that are in place in the traditional banking
sector.
A key vulnerability turned out to be the misplaced assumption that securities dealers and
others would be able to obtain very large amounts of short-term funding even in times of
stress. Indeed, one particularly destabilizing factor in this collapse was the speed with which
liquidity buffers at the large independent security dealers were exhausted. To take just one
illustrative example, Bear Stearns saw a complete loss of its short-term secured funding
virtually overnight. As a consequence, the firm’s liquidity pool dropped by 83 percent in a
two-day span.1
These liquidity dynamics were driven by two main factors. The first factor was the underlying
stress on dealer balance sheets as the prices on complex collateralized debt obligations
(CDOs), private label residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), and commercial real
estate-related assets fell sharply and uncertainty about underlying asset values rose sharply.
The uncertainty stemmed, in part, from the lack of transparency about what prices these
assets could be sold for, which, in turn stemmed from the difficulty of valuing these extremely
complex and heterogeneous securities.
The stress on underlying asset prices and the uncertainty about the valuations of pools of
illiquid assets caused investors to become concerned about the solvency of some of the
weaker dealers.2 These concerns contributed to liquidity pressures, which, in turn, led to
forced asset sales by dealers and others. These sales both further depressed asset prices
and increased asset price volatility.
The second factor contributing to the liquidity crisis was the dependence of dealers on shortterm funding to finance illiquid assets. This short-term funding came mainly from two
sources, the tri-party repo system and customer balances in prime brokerage accounts. By
relying on these sources of funding, dealers were much more vulnerable to runs than was
generally appreciated.
Consider first tri-party repo, a market in which money market funds, securities lending
operations, and other institutions finance assets mainly on an overnight basis. As asset
prices fell and volatility climbed during this period, the financial condition of some dealers
became more troubled. As a result, some investors in this market became worried about the
risk that they might not get their cash returned in the morning, but instead might be stuck with
the collateral that secured their lending. Investors responded by increasing their haircuts –
that is the margin of extra collateral used to secure their funding – and reducing the range of
collateral they would accept as security for their lending. Of course, these very rational
reactions on the part of investors only further weakened the liquidity positions of the major
securities firms.
A similar dynamic occurred in the context of prime brokerage accounts. Some institutions
treated the free cash balances associated with these accounts as if they were a stable
source of funding. Implicitly, they assumed that these balances would be “sticky” due to the
strength of broader business relationships and the cost incurred by customers in shifting the
business elsewhere. However, once markets became strained, this assumption of stable
funding proved to be false. Prime brokerage customers began to withdraw their free credit
balances and some moved their business elsewhere. Both of these steps reduced dealer
liquidity buffers and further tightened the funding noose.

1

The collapse of the shadow banking system, in turn, put intense pressure on commercial banks. Off-balancesheet items came back on to bank balance sheets and the quality of bank assets fell sharply. The end result
was a sharp tightening in the availability of credit that served to exacerbate the downward pressure on
economic activity.

2

Some dealers were further weakened by having provided significant amounts of funding to failed investment
funds, which reduced the amount of funding that was available to meet other needs.

2

BIS Review 143/2009

In the case of the tri-party repo market, the stress on repo borrowers was exacerbated by the
design of the underlying market infrastructure. In this market, investors provide cash each
afternoon to dealers in the form of an overnight loan backed by securities collateral.
Each morning, under normal circumstances, the two clearing banks that operate tri-party
repo systems permit dealers to return the cash to their investors and to retake possession of
their securities portfolios by overdrawing their accounts at the clearing banks. During the day,
the clearing banks finance the dealers’ securities inventories.
Usually, this arrangement works well. However, when a securities dealer becomes troubled
or is perceived to be troubled, the tri-party repo market can become unstable. In particular, if
there is a material risk that a dealer could default during the day, the clearing bank may not
want to return the cash to the tri-party investors in the morning because the bank does not
want to risk being stuck with a very large collateralized exposure that could run into the
hundreds of billions of dollars. Overnight investors, in turn, don’t want to be stuck with the
collateral. So to avoid such an outcome, they may decide not to invest in the first place.
These self-protective reactions on the part of the clearing banks and the investors can cause
the tri-party funding mechanism to rapidly unravel. This dynamic explains the speed with
which Bear Stearns lost funding as tri-party repo investors pulled away quickly.
Despite the strains created by the collapse of Bear Stearns, the “rivets” of the tri-party repo
system held for several reasons. First, Bear Sterns did not fail; instead it was acquired by
JPMorgan Chase with assistance from the Federal Reserve. Second, the Federal Reserve
stepped in to support the tri-party repo system by implementing the Primary Dealer Credit
Facility (PDCF). The PDCF essentially placed the Fed in the role of the tri-party repo investor
of last resort thereby significantly reducing the risk to the clearing banks that they might be
stuck with the collateral. As a consequence, the PDCF reassured end investors that they
could safely keep investing. This, in turn, significantly reduced the risk that a dealer would
not be able to obtain short-term funding through the tri-party repo system.3
Over much of this period preceding the failure of Lehman Brothers, U.S. commercial banks
were relatively insulated from the liquidity run dynamics that plagued the securities dealers.4
This relative stability was due, in part, to the broad access these commercial banks had to
the Fed’s discount window through the traditional primary credit facility and through the Term
Auction Facility (TAF), which had been introduced earlier in the crisis in response to liquidity
strains in the interbank market. The fact that most commercial banks relied on insured
deposits for significant portions of their funding was also important. Not only were these
insured deposits stable sources of funding because they were guaranteed by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), but also because they were unsecured; these
deposits freed up collateral that could be used by banks to secure borrowing from the central
bank and elsewhere.
However, once Lehman Brothers failed, many commercial banks and other financial
institutions encountered significant funding difficulties. News that the Reserve Fund – a large
money market mutual fund – had “broken the buck” due to its holdings of Lehman Brothers
paper led panicked investors to withdraw their funds from money market mutual funds. This
caused the commercial paper market to virtually shut down. This hurt bank holding

3

One final factor that was important in exacerbating the funding crises was the novation of over-the-counter
(OTC) derivative exposures away from a troubled dealer. In a novation, a customer asks a different dealer to
stand in between the customer and the distressed dealer. This process results in the outflow of cash collateral
from the distressed dealer. The novation of OTC derivatives was an important factor behind the liquidity crises
at both Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers.

4

There were funding strains prior to the Lehman Brothers failure and these were most apparent in the elevated
spreads evident in term LIBOR funding compared with the federal funds rate.

BIS Review 143/2009

3

companies and other large financial firms that depended on the commercial paper market for
short-term funding.
The result was a widespread loss of confidence throughout the money market and interbank
funding market. Investors became unwilling to lend even to institutions that they perceived to
be solvent because of worries that others might not share the same opinion. Rollover risk –
the risk that an investor’s funds might not be repaid in a timely way – became extremely high.
The extreme market illiquidity did not abate until a number of extraordinary actions were
taken by the Federal Reserve and others. For example, the Federal Reserve introduced the
Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) to reduce rollover risk in the commercial paper
market, the Federal Reserve and other central banks’ massively expanded the ability of
banks to obtain dollar funding through the TAF and associated foreign exchange swap
programs; the Treasury guaranteed money market mutual fund assets; and the FDIC
increased deposit insurance limits and set up the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program
(TLPG) to backstop bank and bank holding company debt issuance.
Having described “what” happened on the liquidity front during the crisis, I next want to
examine, in a bit more detail, “why” it happened. To do this, I will lay out a simple conceptual
framework that I will then use to assess what can be done to mitigate the risk of such runs
occurring in the future. As a starting point, I will talk about how unsecured lenders react in a
crisis, and then I will consider the behavior of secured lenders.
Unsecured liquidity providers run for two basic reasons. First, they run because there is a
risk that the company they are lending funds to is insolvent. In other words, there is a risk
that the assets will be worth less than the liabilities, creating the potential for loss to the
creditor. The second reason that unsecured creditors run is the risk that they will not be
repaid in a timely way. Even if the borrowing firm ultimately turns out to be solvent, there may
be a delay in a lender getting its funds back, and this delay may prove to be unacceptably
costly to the lender.
This second cause of liquidity runs – the risk of untimely repayment – is significant because it
means that expectations about the behavior of others, or their “psychology”, can be
important. This is a classic coordination problem. Even if a particular lender judges a firm to
be solvent, it might decide not to lend to that firm for fear that others might not share the
same assessment. The less certain any one lender is about the willingness of other lenders
to provide liquidity to a firm, the greater the risk that too few loans will be extended to prevent
liquidation. In that case, even if the lender turns out to be correct in its judgment of the firm’s
solvency, there still will be a cost in terms of delay in receiving repayment.
A few pictures can help to illustrate these concepts. Figure 1 illustrates what a creditor’s
assessment of the net worth of a financial firm might look like in normal times. Creditors have
uncertainty about what that value is, thus, the valuation is represented by a probability
distribution. The higher the degree of uncertainty, the greater is the degree of dispersion in
the probability distribution. As long as the probability distribution is sufficiently far to the right
– in other words – well within positive territory so that there is virtually no risk that the firm is
insolvent, lenders will generally be willing to lend.
So what happens in a financial crisis? First, the probability distribution shifts to the left as the
financial environment deteriorates and the financial firm takes losses that deplete its capital.
Second, and even more importantly, the dispersion of the probability distribution widens –
lenders become more uncertain about the value of the firm. These two phenomena are
shown together in Figure 2. A lack of transparency in the underlying assets will exacerbate
this increase in dispersion. As the degree of dispersion widens, a portion of the probability
distribution falls into negative territory. This means that there is a real risk of loss for
unsecured creditors if the firm were forced to liquidate its assets.
Finally, in a crisis, unsecured lenders become more uncertain about others’ assessment of
the probability distribution. For example, if creditor A believes the probability distribution

4

BIS Review 143/2009

looks like Figure 1, but at the same time is concerned that creditor B views the probability
distribution as looking like Figure 2, creditor A may pull back. If there is a risk creditor B and
others will not lend, the firm may not receive sufficient funding. In other words, even if
creditor A believes the firm is solvent, it may not lend because it does not want to risk a delay
in repayment.
So what can creditors do to mitigate these risks? First, they can respond by charging a
higher interest rate in compensation for the increase in the risk of default. However, there are
a number of difficulties that limit how well this works in practice. Most significantly, by
undermining the firm’s profitability, the higher interest rates may increase the risk of
insolvency. If higher rates push insolvency risk up sharply, then higher rates may not be
sufficient to make lending – even at higher rates – an attractive proposition.
In addition, some investors such as money market mutual funds may have a very low
tolerance for risk. Thus, they may not be interested in trading off higher rates as
compensation for a non-negligible increase in insolvency risk. Finally, paying higher rates
may generate an adverse signal about the health of the borrowing institution. This may cause
investors to become more worried about the risk of default.
Second, creditors can secure their lending – taking collateral valued at more than the amount
they lend. However, this is not foolproof because secured funding can be just as vulnerable
to a run dynamic as unsecured funding. For starters, the same types of uncertainties about
the value of the firm may apply to the liquidation value of the collateral. This is especially the
case if the collateral is lower quality and markets are already illiquid. Moreover, if creditors
are left with the collateral instead of being repaid, fear of widespread collateral liquidation
might further erode collateral values. If investors respond by seeking more collateral to
ensure they will be secured – that is, that they will be made whole in a liquidation scenario –
the firm may run out of high-quality collateral that the firm can borrow against. This is a
significant risk when a financial firm is highly leveraged and equity is only a very small
proportion of total assets.5
The risks of liquidity crises are also exacerbated by some structural sources of instability in
the financial system. Some of these sources are endemic to the nature of the financial
intermediation process and banking. Others are more specific to the idiosyncratic features of
our particular system. Both types deserve attention because they tend to amplify the
pressures that lead to liquidity runs.
Turning first to the more inherent sources of instability, there are at least two that are worthy
of mention. The first instability stems from the fact that most financial firms engage in
maturity transformation – the maturity of their assets is longer than the maturity of their
liabilities. The need for maturity transformation arises from the fact that the preferred habitat
of borrowers tends toward longer-term maturities used to finance long-lived assets such as a
house or a manufacturing plant, compared with the preferred habitat of investors, who
generally have a preference to be able to access their funds quickly. Financial intermediaries
act to span these preferences, earning profits by engaging in maturity transformation –
borrowing shorter-term in order to finance longer-term lending.
If a firm engages in maturity transformation so that its assets mature more slowly than its
liabilities, it does not have the option of simply allowing its assets to mature when funding
dries up. If the liabilities cannot be rolled over, liquidity buffers will soon be weakened.
Maturity transformation means that if funding is not forthcoming, the firm will have to sell
assets. Although this is easy if the assets are high-quality and liquid, it is hard if the assets

5

Moreover, certain classes of investors such as money market mutual funds do not take much comfort in
collateral. Also, the headline risk of having exposure to a troubled participant could subject investors such as
money market funds to liquidity pressures of their own. Investors could withdraw funds before losses are
realized.

BIS Review 143/2009

5

are lower quality. In that case, the forced asset sales are likely to lead to losses, which
deplete capital and raise concerns about insolvency.6
The second inherent source of instability stems from the fact that firms are typically worth
much more as going concerns than in liquidation. This loss of value in liquidation helps to
explain why liquidity crises can happen so suddenly. Initially, no one is worried about
liquidation. The firm is well understood to be solvent as shown in Figure 1. But once
counterparties start to worry about liquidation, the probability distribution can shift very
quickly toward the insolvency line, as shown in Figure 2, because the liquidation value is
lower than the firm’s value as a going concern.
There are also a number of idiosyncratic sources of instability worthy of mention, some of
which are unique to our particular system. One source of instability is the tri-party repo
system that I discussed earlier. Another is the convention of tying collateral calls to credit
ratings. In this case, if a firm’s credit rating is lowered, the firm may have to post additional
collateral to its counterparties, eliminating this collateral as a potential source of funding. This
phenomenon was a particularly important problem for AIG, which lost its access to the
commercial paper market and was subject to increased collateral calls. Both factors caused
the liquidity of the AIG parent company to be depleted very quickly. Finally, if asset volatility
rises, haircuts can increase. This can lead to haircut spirals in which higher haircuts lead to
forced asset sales, increased volatility and still higher haircuts.
These sources of instability create the risk of a cascade – of firms moving rapidly from the
situation represented in Figure 1 to that shown in Figure 2. Once the firm’s viability is in
question and it is does not have access to an insured deposit funding base, the next stop is
often a full-scale liquidity crisis that often cannot be stopped without massive government
intervention.
Fortunately, there are ways to mitigate the risk of a cascade. First, we can require that
financial intermediaries hold more capital. This would push the probability distribution to the
right in Figure 2. With sufficient additional capital, the probability of insolvency could be
reduced to a low enough level that liquidity providers would not run.
Higher capital requirements work to reduce the risk of liquidity runs, but potentially at the cost
of making the process of financial intermediation much more expensive. In particular, a
requirement that firms must hold more capital increases intermediation costs. Moreover,
banks may respond to higher capital requirements by taking on greater risk. If an increase in
risk-taking were to occur, the movement of the probability distribution to the right in Figure 2
might be offset by an increase in the degree of dispersion. Thus, higher capital requirements
might not necessarily be sufficient to push all of the probability distribution above zero.
Second, regulators could require greater liquidity buffers. These buffers would help protect
the firm against having to liquidate assets under duress, and would therefore help prevent
the probability distribution from sliding left toward the zero line in Figure 2. But there is a cost
to the firm from holding greater liquidity buffers in terms of lower returns on capital. So,
requiring greater liquidity buffers would also tend to drive up intermediation costs. And, just
as in the case of higher capital requirements, banks could respond by taking greater risks.
Third, regulators could implement changes that would reduce the degree of dispersion in the
potential value of a firm, pushing the right tail of the distribution in Figure 2 to the left. For
example, we could require greater transparency about the composition and quality of the
firm’s assets and liabilities. Or, regulators could increase transparency by forcing greater
disclosure of the sale price of assets and/or by pushing for greater homogeneity and price

6

6

This problem has been largely addressed in the banking sector by deposit insurance and by providing access
to lender of last resort facilities. In addition, supervisory and reporting requirements address transparency
issues.

BIS Review 143/2009

discovery for products such as OTC derivatives. We could improve the quality of regulation
and supervision, which would increase confidence in regulatory measures of capital and
financial firms’ soundness.
Fourth, the central bank could provide a liquidity backstop to solvent firms. For example, the
central bank could commit to being the lender of last resort as long as it judged the firm to be
solvent and with sufficient collateral. This would reduce the coordination problem and the risk
of panics sparked by uncertainty among lenders about what other creditors think. If the
central bank is willing to provide backstop liquidity, then a lender that judges the financial firm
to be solvent should be willing to lend. The backstop liquidity ensures timely repayment. The
lender of last resort role eliminates the externality in which the expectations about the
willingness of one lender to lend influences the decisions of others.
However, providing a liquidity backstop is not without its own set of problems. If firms have
liquidity backstops that are viewed as credible, then this creates moral hazard. Firms do not
have to worry as much about what lenders think about their capital adequacy or the size of
their liquidity buffers. This creates incentives to run leaner in terms of capital and liquidity,
which increases the risks to the backstop liquidity provider.
To mitigate such effects, the backstop liquidity provider could presumably charge financial
firms for the value of the backstop. But what fee would be appropriate? It is difficult to assess
the probability of financial panics and the value of backstop liquidity facilities.7
Fifth, regulators could take steps to reduce the difference between the value of the firm dead
versus alive. For example, we could improve the resolution process so that less of a firm’s
value is destroyed by the liquidation process. If we could reduce the difference in value
between a firm as a going concern versus the same firm in liquidation we could reduce the
severity of the cascade effect when financial conditions deteriorate.
Sixth, we could make structural changes to the financial system to make it more stable in
terms of liquidity provision. For example, consider the three structural issues outlined earlier
that amplified the crisis – tri-party repo, collateral requirements tied to credit ratings, and
haircut spirals. In the case of tri-party repo, the amplifying dynamics could be reduced by
enforcing standards that limited the scope of eligible collateral or required more conservative
haircuts. Formal loss-sharing arrangements among tri-party repo borrowers, investors, and
clearing banks might reduce or eliminate any advantage that might stem from running early.
Eliminating the market’s reliance on intraday credit provided by clearing banks could
eliminate the tension between the interests of clearing banks and investors when a dealer
becomes troubled. In the case of collateral requirements, collateral haircuts could be
required to be independent of ratings.
Many of these suggestions are already in the process of being implemented. For example,
the Basel Committee is in the process of strengthening bank capital in four ways: 1) higher
capital requirements; 2) higher quality capital; 3) more complete risk capture; and 4) capital
conservation measures, including the use of contingent capital instruments. With greater
capital buffers, the risk of liquidity runs should be reduced going forward. It should be noted,
however, that use of contingent capital instruments, or any other potential changes to our
current capital regime, does not obviate the need for an improved resolution process.
Second, the Basel Committee is moving forward with its work in establishing liquidity
standards for large, complex financial institutions. These liquidity standards would consist of
two parts. First, there would be a liquidity buffer made up of high-quality liquid assets that
would be of sufficient size so that the firm could manage a stress event caused by a shortterm loss of investor confidence. Second, there would be rules concerning the degree of

7

Supervision could also be brought to bear to limit the tendency for firms to reduce their capital and liquidity
when provided with a credible liquidity backstop.

BIS Review 143/2009

7

allowable maturity transformation. Long-term illiquid assets would have to be largely funded
by equity and longer-term borrowing, not by short-term borrowing, such as tri-party repo.
Third, the Federal Reserve is working with a broad range of private sector participants,
including dealers, clearing banks, and tri-party repo investors to eliminate the structural
instability of the tri-party repo system so that tri-party borrowers are less vulnerable to runs.
Exactly how the mechanics of the tri-party repo system will be adjusted is still a work in
process.8
Fourth, the major U.S. securities dealers are now subject to supervision by the Federal
Reserve under the Bank Holding Company Act. This means that their liquidity funding needs
are subject to supervisory oversight, including stress tests, to ensure that the firms can meet
large funding drains.
Liquidity risk will never be eliminated, nor should it. The preferences of borrowers to borrow
long and of lenders to lend short means that the maturity transformation process generates
real benefits. However, we can do better to make our system less prone to the types of
liquidity runs that we have experienced. If we remain committed to implementing the reforms
that are already underway, I am confident that we can dramatically reduce the risks of the
type of liquidity crises that we experienced all too recently.
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions.

8

8

Work is also underway to shift the settlement of OTC derivative trades to central counterparties (CCPs). This
is important because CCPs reduce risk exposures by netting out the offsetting exposures among the CCP
participants. Also, because the counterparty risks move to the CCP rather than staying with the individual
dealers, the incentive to novate - move trades away from troubled dealers - is reduced.

BIS Review 143/2009

BIS Review 143/2009

9

William C Dudley: Still more lessons from the crisis
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Columbia University World Leaders’ Forum, New York,
7 December 2009.
*

*

*

It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here this evening. I was a freshman here at
Columbia nearly 40 years ago. I’m certainly glad to be back, but I must admit that there is a
downside: It does make me feel a bit old in the process.
Tonight, I want to talk about two broad sets of issues: First, the Federal Reserve’s role in
responding to the crisis and the steps we must take to reduce, as much as possible, the risks
of this type of costly and painful episode in the future and, second, the economic outlook for
2010 and some of the challenges that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) faces in
the conduct of monetary policy.
The actions undertaken by the Federal Reserve over the past two and a half years have
been critical to stabilizing the financial system and preventing the extraordinary distress in
markets from causing a deeper and more protracted economic downturn. Much of the Fed’s
ability to respond as effectively as it did during this crisis, whether it was from a monetary
policy, a “lender-of-last resort” or a supervisory perspective, came from its breadth and depth
of knowledge and experience with financial institutions, financial markets and financial
market infrastructure, both inside and outside of the United States. That said, there is also no
question that the Federal Reserve and other regulators could have done more to prevent this
crisis. That is why, even as the Fed has engaged in extraordinary efforts to stabilize the
financial system over the past couple of years, it has also been moving quickly to make the
internal changes necessary to strengthen our effectiveness. In addition, the Fed has been
working with other regulators in and outside of the U.S. to craft and implement the broader
changes in regulation and supervision that are necessary to make our financial system more
robust and resilient going forward.
Turning to the outlook, the recession now appears to be over, but the economy is still weak
and the unemployment rate is much too high. These circumstances underpin the FOMC’s
commitment to keeping short term rates exceptionally low for an extended period. However,
at the same time, it deserves emphasizing that the Federal Reserve will be willing and able
to exit from this period smoothly when the time comes to ensure that inflation stays low and
inflation expectations well anchored.
As always, my comments represent my own views and opinions, not necessarily those of the
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the Fed and other regulators, both here and
abroad, did not sufficiently understand some of the critical vulnerabilities in the financial
system, including the consequences of inappropriate incentives, and the opacity and the
large number of self-amplifying mechanisms that were embedded within the system.
Likewise, we did not appreciate all the ramifications of the growth of the shadow banking
system and its linkage back to regulated financial institutions until after the crisis began.
Of course, understanding now what we did not understand then is only half the battle. We
need to respond to ensure that ongoing changes in our financial system do not threaten the
stability of the financial system in the future.
For one, the crisis is provoking a reevaluation of our views on how to respond to asset
bubbles. For years, central bank orthodoxy has been that you cannot identify asset bubbles
very well. Thus, the strategy has been to move aggressively to clean up such bubbles after
they have burst.

BIS Review 161/2009

1

I think our level of confidence in that approach has been considerably reduced in the wake of
the crisis that we have just experienced. The costs of cleaning up after the fact have been
immense.
But make no mistake – developing an effective, more proactive approach is not easy. Among
the important questions that need to be answered:
1.

How does one identify bubbles – which I’ll define here as persistent large deviations
in asset prices from their fundamental value – in real time?

2.

What instruments can be used to limit the development of bubbles and/or allow
bubbles to deflate in non-catastrophic ways that will not damage the economy in
other ways?

Turning to the first issue, identifying asset bubbles in real time is difficult. However,
identifying variables that often are associated with asset bubbles – especially credit asset
bubbles – may be less daunting. To take one recent example, there was a tremendous
increase in financial leverage in the U.S. financial system over the period from 2003 to 2007,
particularly in the nonbank financial sector. This sharp rise in leverage was observable.
Presumably, this rise in leverage also raised the risks of a financial asset bubble and the
impact of this bubble on housing certainly raised the stakes for the real economy if such a
bubble were to burst. This suggests that limiting the overall increase in leverage throughout
the system could have reduced the risk of a bubble and the consequences if the bubble were
to burst.
Turning to the second issue of how to limit and/or deflate bubbles in an orderly fashion, the
fact that increases in leverage are often associated with financial asset bubbles suggests
that limiting increases in leverage may help to prevent bubbles from being created in the first
place. This again suggests that there is a role for supervision and regulation in the bubble
prevention process. For example, it might be appropriate for the Federal Reserve – working
with functional regulators such as the SEC (Securities Exchange Commission) – to monitor
and limit the buildup in leverage at the major securities firms and the leverage extended from
these firms to their clients and counterparties.
Whether there is a role for monetary policy to limit asset bubbles is a more difficult question.
On the one hand, monetary policy is a blunt tool for use in preventing bubbles because
monetary policy actions also have important consequences for real economic activity,
employment and inflation. On the other hand, however, there is evidence that monetary
policy does have an impact on desired leverage through its impact on the shape of the yield
curve. A tighter monetary policy, by flattening the yield curve, may limit the buildup in
leverage. 1
Whether it would be more effective to limit leverage directly by regulatory and supervisory
means or via monetary policy is still an open question. But it is becoming increasingly clear
that a totally hands off approach is problematic.
I also believe we could have done better in our supervision of the large complex commercial
banking organizations. For example, the recent reports issued by the Senior Supervisors
Group (SSG), which is composed of regulators from five major countries, indicated that the
banking regulators both here and abroad should have been tougher in the assessment of the
quality of management, of governance, and in terms of these banks’ risk management

1

2

There is a growing body of economics literature on this issue that links monetary policy to leverage. See, for
example, Tobias Adrian and Hyun Shin, manuscript in preparation for the forthcoming Handbook of Monetary
Economics, volume 3, currently circulated as Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 398,
October 2009.

BIS Review 161/2009

capabilities. 2 We should also have pushed harder for better management information
systems and more simplified corporate organizations and structures. We should have done
more to identify best practices in terms of risk management, liquidity, capital, and
compensation and pushed harder to force the laggards to move to best practice standards.
We are learning a lot about how to do supervision better and are working aggressively to
apply those lessons to our current practices. The Supervisory Capital Assessment Process
or SCAP is an important example of the value of broad, horizontal examinations. In the
SCAP, the Federal Reserve worked in conjunction with other U.S. regulators to assess the
impact of a stress economic environment on the 19 largest banking organizations in the
country simultaneously. This approach made the SCAP a particularly powerful exercise. It
allowed supervisors to ensure that the collective results of the individual banks were
consistent with a top-down assessment of revenue and credit losses generated from an
adverse stress scenario for the macroeconomy. We are incorporating these types of broad,
horizontal reviews more deeply into our supervision process.
So, what else are we doing going forward? There are a large number of initiatives under way
to make our financial system more robust to shocks and more resilient to the inevitable
swings in activity and sentiment. These initiatives include several aimed at strengthening
bank capital requirements. When these initiatives are fully implemented, they should prevent
some of the practices we witnessed during the crisis – for example, a banking organization
paying out dividends to demonstrate that it is strong when, in fact, by depleting capital, such
an action is making it weaker.
One important initiative in this regard is to better capture all the sources of risk in the capital
assessment process. This, for example, includes the trading accounts of banks. Some
institutions had clearly not set aside adequate levels of capital given the risks that were
embedded in their trading positions.
We are also exploring the potential for contingent capital. The goal is to bolster the amount of
common equity available to absorb losses in adverse economic environments. This might be
done by allowing the issuance of debt instruments that would automatically convert into
common equity in stress environments, under certain pre-specified conditions. Such
instruments might have proven very helpful had they been in place before and during this
crisis. Investors would have anticipated that common equity would be replenished
automatically if a firm came under stress, and this knowledge might in turn have tempered
anxieties about counterparty risk. At a minimum, contingent capital instruments might have
enabled common equity buffers at the weaker firms to be replenished earlier and
automatically, thereby reducing uncertainty and the risk of failure.
There are many details that still need to be worked out to determine the potential for
contingent capital instruments to enhance financial stability. For example, what are the
circumstances under which conversion is triggered? How much common equity do debt
holders receive upon conversion? However, our early work on this issue suggests that
contingent capital may be a promising mechanism for injecting common equity into the
banking system in times of stress without unduly raising intermediation costs or pushing
financial activity out of the banking sector into the unregulated sector.
On the liquidity front, there are a host of initiatives underway. For starters, the Federal
Reserve is now supervising most of the holding companies of the systemically important
financial institutions. That was not true at the start of the crisis. So, for example, the holding
companies of Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and Merrill Lynch, which is now a subsidiary

2

See, for example, Senior Supervisors Group, “Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of
2008,” October 21, 2009, and “Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market
Turbulence,” March 6, 2008.

BIS Review 161/2009

3

of Bank of America, are now under our direct supervision. We are making sure that they
have appropriate liquidity buffers and capital.
Second, the Federal Reserve is working with a broad range of private sector participants,
including dealers, clearing banks, and tri-party repo investors to dramatically reduce the
structural instability of the financial system utilities, such as the tri party repo system.
Third, the Basel Committee is working on establishing international standards for liquidity
requirements. There are two parts to this. The first is a requirement for a short-term liquidity
buffer of sufficient size so that an institution that was shut out of the market for several weeks
would still have sufficient liquidity to continue its operations unimpaired. The second is a
liquidity standard that limits the degree of permissible maturity transformation – that is, the
amount of short-term borrowing allowed to be used in the funding of long-term illiquid assets.
Under these standards, a firm’s holdings of illiquid long-term assets would need to be funded
mainly by equity or long-term debt. 3
There is also work underway on the problem of how to ensure that financial institutions have
compensation structures that curb rather than encourage excessive risk taking. This issue of
compensation is obviously a hugely potent one, as there is a fundamental unfairness in what
has happened over the past few years. The actions taken by the Federal Reserve and others
to stabilize the financial system had the effect of rescuing many of the same financial
institutions that contributed to this crisis. Many of those financial institutions are now
prospering, and many of their employees will be highly compensated. This situation is unfair
on its face. But it is even more galling in an environment in which the unemployment rate is
10 percent and many people are struggling to make ends meet.
Despite the fundamental unfairness of the situation, I don’t think it is feasible or practical for
the Federal Reserve, or any other supervisory entity, to attempt to determine the level of
compensation at individual firms on an ongoing basis. A better approach is for supervisors to
ensure that a firm’s compensation regime is consistent with an institution’s safety and
soundness and with broader financial stability. That can and should have important
implications for the level of individual compensation. For example, a trader should not be
paid solely on the basis of this year’s accounting profits if those profits are based on the
valuation of illiquid assets held on the bank’s books that could easily go down considerably in
value before they are liquidated.
The Fed is in the process of implementing a framework that will embed compensation
practices more deeply into the supervisory process. We have made it clear to the major
banks and dealers that 2009 compensation should be consistent with the recently developed
Financial Stability Board principles on compensation, which emphasize the importance of
appropriate incentives.
Finally, there is considerable work underway on the “too big to fail” problem. On this front,
there are two main strands of work. First, we must improve the resolution mechanisms for
large complex bank holding companies and nonbank financial firms that become troubled,
and to complement that initiative with efforts to strengthen the financial market infrastructure.
If regulators had at their disposal an effective resolution mechanism for large financial firms
and the financial system was made more resilient to shocks, then the number of firms that
were indeed “too big to fail” would be significantly reduced. Second, after building such a
resolution mechanism, we must still act to ensure that no special advantage persists from
being perceived by creditors, counterparties and investors as “too big to fail.” After all, it will
be hard to build a resolution mechanism that credibly ensures that any firm will be allowed to
fail under any circumstance. If there is a chance that a firm may be too big to fail, then there

3

4

For more on liquidity issues see “More Lessons from the Crisis,” Remarks by William C. Dudley at the Center
for Economic Policy Studies (CEPS) Symposium, Princeton University, November 13, 2009.

BIS Review 161/2009

should be an explicit quid pro quo for that status in the form of higher capital and liquidity
requirements. For example, contingent capital could be made a part of any additional
regulatory capital requirements for “too-big-to-fail” firms.
As I have discussed, we are moving forcefully to make the system more robust and resilient.
While at times, the criticism of the Federal Reserve and other regulators has been on target,
at other times, I believe it has been off the mark. For example, the Federal Reserve has been
singled out for criticism about the failures of supervision even though it did not have any
regulatory responsibility for many of the largest U.S. financial firms that collapsed during the
crisis. 4
American International Group, Inc. (AIG) is an important case in point. The Federal Reserve
learned about the significant liquidity problems AIG was experiencing only shortly before the
Lehman bankruptcy. At that time, we were assured that a private-sector consortium was
being assembled to provide AIG with liquidity support if that proved to be necessary.
Unfortunately, once Lehman filed its Chapter 11 petition on September 15th, the environment
worsened and the lending consortium fell apart.
A recent report by the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program
(SIGTARP) suggested that the Federal Reserve should have had a contingency plan in place
for AIG. The reality is that, in fact, the Federal Reserve was the contingency plan. Once the
private sector backed away from AIG, the Fed, with the full support of the Treasury, was
called upon to do something extraordinary and lend to AIG. The Federal Reserve had no
oversight authority over this institution whatsoever, but it stepped into the breach and lent to
AIG to prevent a catastrophic collapse of the financial system and to protect the public from
the fallout that would have resulted.
There has also been a lot of criticism – in the recent SIGTARP report and elsewhere – that
the Federal Reserve should have forced AIG’s major counterparties to take haircuts in
conjunction with setting up Maiden Lane III. The reasons for the Fed’s actions in this situation
are straightforward. From the moment the U.S. government made it clear that its goal was to
prevent AIG’s bankruptcy in order to stem a broader collapse of the financial system, this
undercut the ability to obtain concessions from AIG’s counterparties. To put it starkly, power
in a negotiation comes either from being able to issue a credible threat or from coercion.
Bankruptcy at that point for AIG was simply not credible in the context of the actions taken to
rescue the firm in the first place, and threatening bankruptcy would have been at cross
purposes to the broader goal of stabilizing the financial system. Using our supervisory power
in a coercive manner would have been an abuse of that supervisory power.
I have highlighted this example because it provides a stark illustration of two critical
shortcomings in our current regulatory system. The first is the fact that a large, systemically
important institution like AIG was able to slip through the cracks in our regulatory structure
and put our entire system at risk. The second is the lack of an effective resolution regime for
large bank holding companies and nonbank financial institutions. Absent such a regime, a
commitment to support a failing firm inevitably results in the loss of leverage in negotiating
with counterparties and creditors.
Turning now to another difficult issue, it is deeply offensive to Americans, including me, and
runs counter to basic notions of justice and fairness, that some of the very same individuals
and financial firms that precipitated this crisis have also benefited so directly from the
response to the crisis. This has occurred at the same time that many Americans have lost

4

AIG was supervised by the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) and state insurance commissioners. Bear
Stearns and Lehman Brothers were supervised by the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC), Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac were supervised by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO), and
Washington Mutual and Indy Mac were supervised by the OTS. The Fed's involvement with many of these
firms came only through its lender of last resort role.

BIS Review 161/2009

5

their jobs and hard-earned savings. The public outrage this situation has produced is
understandable. In the context of actions taken to support the financial system, the Federal
Reserve and other government agencies have provided considerable support to banking
organizations and other large systemically important financial institutions. The employees
and executives of those institutions have benefitted from our intervention. In a perfect world
we would be able to prevent those individuals and institutions from benefitting; we would
have a better way to penalize those who acted recklessly. But once the crisis was underway,
one goal took precedence: keeping the financial system from collapsing in order to protect
the nation from an even deeper and more protracted downturn that would have been more
damaging to everyone.
The Great Depression represents an important example of the consequences of inaction.
Recall that during the Great Depression the unemployment rate rose to 24 percent. It is
generally accepted that the authorities at that time, by not responding sooner and more
forcefully, contributed greatly to the severity and duration of the Great Depression. In
contrast, during this crisis, the Fed and other agencies acted much more aggressively to
ward off a total collapse of our financial system – liquidity was restored to markets and the
banking system was recapitalized much more quickly. These aggressive actions helped to
prevent the type of deep and protracted crisis that occurred during the 1930s.
Going forward, the Federal Reserve and other regulators need to move aggressively to
change the system so we don’t ever find ourselves in this position again. We need to
improve our ability to identify catalysts for potential crises, whether those catalysts manifest
themselves in the form of asset price bubbles or reside elsewhere. Perhaps most critical
among the challenges facing policymakers and lawmakers is how to ensure that we have a
more effective regulatory structure going forward.
This is a complex subject that I do not have time to do justice here tonight. However, I
believe it is important to explain why the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy, lender of last
resort and supervisory functions should remain in place. These functions are interrelated so
that the execution of one of these responsibilities helps the Federal Reserve in its conduct of
the others.
For example, consider the Fed’s lender of last resort function. For the Fed to perform this
role effectively, it is important that it have first-hand knowledge about banks, the capital
markets, and payment and settlement systems. To perform this role safely, it must know its
borrowers, which is why a supervisory role is essential. Put simply, if supervisory and other
financial oversight responsibilities were taken from the Fed, it would make it more difficult for
us to perform our lender of last resort function. To do that well and safely, it is important that
we understand banks, the financial system and all its interconnections.
One instructive example in this context is the Northern Rock experience in the United
Kingdom, where banking supervision and the lender of last resort functions were separated.
Many have concluded that this separation led to coordination problems that delayed
intervention and significantly exacerbated the crisis. The experience with Northern Rock is a
cautionary lesson about the potential costs of separating banking oversight from the lender of
last resort function.
A similar argument applies to monetary policy. In the conduct of monetary policy, it is
important to understand how changes in the federal funds rate or the interest rate on excess
reserves affect financial conditions. A detailed understanding of banks, capital markets and
payment and settlement systems is essential to properly understand the linkage between
monetary policy, the financial system, and the real economy. In other words, if you take away
the Fed’s oversight of the financial system, the ability of the Fed policymakers to understand
how their actions are going to affect financial conditions and the economy will be impaired.
The economy will suffer as a consequence.
Shifting gears, let me talk a bit about the economic outlook. My views about the outlook have
not changed much recently and do not differ much from the consensus. The situation is

6

BIS Review 161/2009

slowly improving. We are having a recovery in terms of output and the pace of job losses has
slowed substantially. In the second half of this year, real GDP growth will likely fall in a
3 percent to 3.5 percent annualized range. 2010 will probably be slightly weaker than that,
mostly because some of the current sources of strength are temporary. The inventory cycle
is providing lots of support right now and the fiscal stimulus – which is very powerful right
now – will abate as we go through 2010.
2010 is also likely to be a more moderate growth period because we still face quite a few
headwinds generated by the hangover of the financial crisis. The banks are still under
pressure in terms of credit losses. The shadow banking system is still impaired and
securitization activity is recovering very slowly. For example, last month we saw the first
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) deal in a year and a half. This means that
the constraints on credit availability will take considerably more time to fully abate.
If growth is subdued, this implies that the unemployment rate will stay high and inflation will
stay low. If this outlook is broadly correct, this suggests that it will be appropriate to keep the
federal funds rate target exceptionally low for an extended period. One risk in the outlook is
that inflation expectations could become less well-anchored. This could conceivably occur for
several reasons. First, people may worry that the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s
balance sheet and the increase in the Federal debt will prove inflationary over time. Second,
some may worry that the Congress could take actions that would call into question the Fed’s
independence with respect to monetary policy and that this could cause the Fed to be less
willing to tighten monetary policy in a timely way in the future.
A rise in long-term inflation expectations above levels consistent with price stability would be
a very unwelcome development because inflation expectations are an important determinant
of actual inflation. In principle, if inflation expectations rose, this could push up actual inflation
despite the high unemployment rate. Obviously, this would make it more difficult for the
Federal Reserve to use monetary policy to achieve its dual objective of full employment and
price stability.
On the issue of the size of the Fed’s balance sheet, the worry among some is that the rapid
growth of the Fed’s balance sheet will ultimately lead to an inflation problem. This anxiety
stems from the fact that periods of rapid growth of the monetary base (that is, currency plus
bank reserves) in the past have typically been followed by rapid credit growth and inflation.
While I understand the concerns, I do not believe they are well-founded. We have a new tool:
the ability to pay interest on excess reserves and that should enable us to cut the link
between the size of our balance sheet and credit creation and inflation. If we raise the
interest rate on excess reserves, we can incentivize banks to hold the excess reserves with
us rather than lend them out.
And that should work, because the price of credit is an important determinant of credit
demand. If the FOMC were to raise the interest rate paid on excess reserves, this would
raise the price of credit. That, in turn, would limit the demand for credit. As a result, the
excess reserves wouldn’t be lent out; instead, the excess reserves would stay parked at the
Fed.
That said, the Fed’s exit from its current monetary policy stance is going to be more
complicated than normal. Normally, when we exit, we simply decide when we are going to
raise the federal funds rate target. This time, we have a broader set of decisions to make.
For example, do we drain reserves from the banking system? Is it better for the banking
system to operate with $500 billion of excess reserves or $1 trillion? This is an issue we have
to explore further. In the meantime, we are testing our ability to drain reserves through the
use of reverse repurchase agreements. It is important that this option be available to us in
the event we want to use it.
Although it is going to be more complicated in the sense that we have more decisions to
make about how to manage our exit, I believe the process is manageable. The fact we have

BIS Review 161/2009

7

more levers doesn’t mean that we will have trouble exiting when the time comes, it just
means that we will have more choices to make.
Turning to the issue of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy independence, I believe this is
a critical issue. As you know, the Paul amendment, which was inserted into the House
Financial Services bill, would subject the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy decisions to
audit by the General Accountability Office (GAO).
We should think about how market participants will react to the potential politicization of the
monetary policy process. Knowing that a decision to raise interest rates today might be
criticized by the GAO six months later, market participants could begin to worry about the
Fed’s willingness to make tough choices in terms of tightening monetary policy. If that were
the case, inflation expectations could become less well anchored. This, in turn, would make it
more difficult to keep inflation under control, even if the fears of market participants about the
Fed ultimately turned out to be unwarranted.
Our monetary policy decisions are already public and a wide range of Fed officials explain
the rationale for our actions. It has been well established around the world that monetary
policy independence leads to better outcomes in terms of unemployment and inflation. In my
view, any legislation that would cast doubts about the Fed’s independence in the conduct of
monetary policy would not be beneficial to this country.
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions.

8

BIS Review 161/2009

